The Two Chief Schools ...
Author: De Vere, Aubrey.
Publication info: Essays; Chiefly On Poetry . 295 p. London: Macmillan and Co, 1887.

The Two Chief Schools Of English Poetry. Poetic Versatility; Shelley And Keats [in, Essays; Chiefly on Poetry. By Aubrey de Vere, LL. D. in Two Vols]
[Page ]
X THE TWO CHIEF SCHOOLS OF ENGLISH POETRY. POETIC VERSATILITY
SHELLEY AND KEATS A poet is often praised for his versatility, as though it were gift special to himself, by persons who have not sufficiently observed that it is a quality inherent in all high poetic imagination, although it should doubtless be balanced by a converse quality—viz. intellectual and moral unity. There are two sorts of Versatility. Spurious Versatility is only the exercise of that imitative power which betrays a want of original conception and tenacity of poetic purpose. It is a volatile sympathy with impressions merely external, united with an incapacity of receiving a principle or resting on a conclusion. Genuine Versatility unites mobility of temperament with a large mind and an imagination which takes in all things without absolutely surrendering itself to any, while it can also concentrate itself at will. It is only when the “various
[Page 101]
talents” are united with “the single mind” that they give their possessors “moral might and mastery o'er mankind.” The Hebrew Poet says, “My heart is fixed,” and then proceeds, “I will sing.” And it is truly when the heart is most fixed that the imagination can afford to be most flexible. It may wave like a pine-tree in the breeze, if, like the pine, it sends its root deep into the soil. On these conditions, the more versatile the genius is, the ampler will be its sweep, and the mightier its resilient power. It is such versatility that enables the poet to apply his own experience, analogically and by imaginative induction, to regions unknown and forms of life untried, at once passing into the being of others and retaining his own. The characters delineated by the greatest poets have therefore been always remarked to possess two great attributes—those of universality and individuality. But they could never unite these two if the corresponding faculties were not united in the versatile imagination, profound moral sense, and accurate observation of the true poet. For want of the first faculty there are men who can produce but a single work of value. Beyond the limit of their individual experience there is for them nil nisi pontus et aer , and within that narrow pasture their faculties grow lean. On the other hand, there are too many who, for want of moral depth and tenacity in conjunction with versatility, remain for ever but imitators, and wholly fail to fulfil the promise of their earlier and happier efforts.
[Page 102]
To corroborate these opinions it is only needful to observe that the greatest of dramatists not only exhibits the faculty of versatility in its perfection, but proves to us that that gift is consistent with what is most characteristic in genius, and most harmonious in its mode of working. Shakespeare, it has been said, is but a voice. If so, it is a voice direct from Nature's heart, not the voice of a mocking bird. The affection which we feel for him is in itself a proof of this. In poetry, as elsewhere, those who forget themselves are the last to be forgotten by others. Shakespeare is everywhere present in his poetry, though he may be nowhere distinctly or completely seen. As the spirit of poetry tacitly pervades all nature,—refreshing, consoling, renewing,—so Shakespeare himself accompanies us through all his works, a potent and friendly genius. In all his thoughts we recognise one method of thought; his own sweet and large nature ever mediates between the natures that he describes, even when they are most discordant; his manner is familiar to us, and throughout his ample domain we recognise his genial laugh or his doubtful smile—like that of the Dryad evanescent in the branches, or the Nereid descending in the wave. Does any one need a biography to tell him whether Shakespeare was a kindly man or cold, liberal or niggardly, humble or proud? whether his faults were faults of infirmity or of malice? whether there were weeds amid his abundance, or whether his heart was a field protected from them by its barrenness? whether he was a patriot, or had secluded
[Page 103]
himself from national sympathies? whether his disposition was to believe or to scoff? These questions, at all events, have hitherto furnished no materials for critical battles.
It is of course in dramatic poetry that versatility is most needed; but all genuine poetry is in its spirit dramatic. It would be a truism to remark, that in narrative poetry there is a dramatic element,—it being, in fact, the soil out of which the drama (but a more concentrated form of narration) grew. Even in idyllic and in descriptive poetry the dramatic, and therefore the versatile faculty, is also necessary; nay, the humblest object which includes the beautiful, or has ever inspired song, cannot be poetically appreciated by one who is unwilling to forget himself, or unable to pass into other forms of being. In many an orderly and compact tragedy there is less of dramatic versatility than in Burns's allusion to a worn-out horse, or Dante's description of the bird
                                         . . . . who midst the leafy bower
Has in her nest sat darkling through the night,
With her sweet brood; impatient to descry
Their wished looks, and to bring home their food. 1
Such things, it is obvious, cannot be thus described unless they are known—nor thus known except through the imaginative insight of the affections. Sympathy is, in truth, but versatility of heart; and large sympathies are, therefore, the most powerful auxiliaries of poetic genius. For the same reason egotism, prejudice,
[Page 104]
a habit of dogmatism, and whatever else locks up our sympathies, are impediments to poetry. On the other hand, among many supposed to be removed from literary influences—among the poor, and especially among children—the very essence of poetry is to be found in the form of prompt and extended sympathies. A versatile imagination is indeed the chief faculty of children. Having as yet hardly realised a self-conscious being of their own, they have the less difficulty in passing into that of others. The consequence is that their life is almost wholly poetical; all that goes on around them is a long drama; a piece of stick with a ribbon tied to it represents a king or a queen; and they can hold dramatic colloquy with men and women impersonated by their fancy alone. Hans Andersen's genius consists mainly in his being persistently a child. It has been often remarked, that with nations also the poetical period is that of early youth. And the reason of this is, that when men have ceased to be pressed down by the selfish wants of savage life, and not yet made selfish by the conventions of material civilisation, the imagination has a versatility, and sympathy a vital power, which at other periods is unknown. It is then that Emotion is strong; in other words, that man has a power of moving out of himself ; it is then that the most ordinary objects appear to him wonderful, and that nothing wonderful is either extraordinary or incredible; it is then that religion is natural to him, and that Nature is invested with supernatural attributes, and regarded with religious
[Page 105]
awe. A lively sensibility to grief and joy, to love and to hate, is that through which all outward things acquire for us a real existence, and become objects of interest. In the absence of these, our nearest domestic concerns would have for us as remote and visionary an existence as spiritual truths possess for the merely secular intelligence; and in the presence of these, not only the animal races are brought home to our human sympathies—the brooding bird, or the faithful hound—but the inanimate elements become humanised; waves and clouds live in our life; if they swell, it is in wrath; if they fly, it is in fear; if they pursue, it is in love. In other words, Nature itself, and all its powers, are dramatised; and the faculty which makes them rehearse their several parts is that of a versatile imagination.
Versatility changes its character at the different seasons of the poetic growth. In a young poet it is indeed but a part of his docility. He will listen, with the susceptive faith of youth, successively to each of the great masters of song; and the echo which remains in his ear will in some degree modulate his tone. He will trace every path which the Muse has trod, in the hope of reaching that point from which they diverge; and it is well that he should try all things, provided he holds fast to that which for him is best. The infancy of the life poetic, like that of all life, learns much by unconscious imitation; but it can only so learn when the poet possesses those original faculties which, even when they imitate, seek help only to work out their
[Page 106]
proper development. True genius will soon cast aside whatever is alien to its individual nature; while, on the other hand, incorporating into its proper substance all poetic elements that are truly congenial, it will blend them also with each other, and stamp upon them a unity of its own. The poet will become original when he wields collectively the powers that once were his only alternately; and versatility will then have been exalted into a higher gift,—that of comprehensiveness.
Except at periods of barbarism, of thoroughly corrupt morals, or of utter effeminacy, the poetic instinct will ever assert itself; for the imagination pervades nearly the whole of our nature; and is sure to work its way up into the light, no matter through what obstructions. If the age be a poetical one, the imagination will embody its sentiment, and illustrate its tendencies. If it be unpoetical, the imagination will not therefore be repressed. It will then create a world for itself—or revert to some historic period the memorials of which it will invest with a radiance not their own. Unquestionably those ages are the most favourable to poetry in which the imagination can pluck the ears of corn as it passes through the field, and is not obliged to seek its food afar. At those periods in which no political conventions strive to supply the place of valour and wisdom in rulers and of a generous loyalty in subjects, in which the first great trimphs of patriotism are won, and in which temples rise from the ground at the bidding of a zeal which has not learned to economise its efforts,—at such
[Page 107]
periods it is that poetry is most genial, most real, and most authentic. Such were the periods at which Homer, Dante, and Shakespeare wrote. The heroic age of Greece, the theology and philosophy of mediæval Europe, and the manners and history of England, furnished these men respectively with the main materials of their verse. These are the great National poets of the world. They belong indeed to all ages; but they belonged especially each to his own. The materials of each were supplied by the objects surrounding him, or by the traditions which had descended to him by inheritance.
It would, however, be a grave error to suppose that the national is alone the great poet. On the contrary, it is among the results of poetic versatility, as well as of the instincts of the human heart, that there has ever existed in our literature, and, to no small degree, in that of other countries, two great schools of poetry, one only of which can properly be called national. It does not depend on the circumstances of the age alone whether the poet finds his materials in the circle of surrounding things, or seeks them elsewhere: this will in the main be determined by the constitution of his own moral nature, and the preponderance in it of a vivid sympathy with reality on the one hand, or, on the other, of an ardent aspiration after a supreme excellence. In either case the same high gift, the imagination, will lend to him its mediating powers, in the former interpreting the outward world to him, in the latter interpreting his ideal to his fellow-men. Even in the best and
[Page 108]
healthiest periods of national development the human mind will aspire after a region more exalted and pure than it can ever find on earth; even in the most prosaic it will be able to detect something noble in the world of common things. From this double power arise two converse schools of poetry; the one characterised by its plastic power and its function of embodying the abstractedly great and the ideally beautiful; the other by its reality, its home-bred sympathies, and its affinities with national history, character, and manners. These two schools have existed from the beginning of our literature, and have been reproduced in our own day. The merest outline will illustrate the momentous truth that neither in nations nor in individuals does poetry hold an isolated existence, but that it flourishes or declines in conjunction with that moral, political, and spiritual wellbeing which, when itself sound, it helps to sustain, though by two very different modes of procedure.
Poetry has ever recognised these two great offices, distinct though allied—the one, that of representing the actual world; the other, that of creating an ideal region, into which spirits whom this world has wearied may retire. The former function is chiefly discharged by the historia spectabilis of the drama; the latter belongs for the most part to poets lyrical or mythic, who, in the “enchanted islands” of the Fancy, or in the “snowy cloisters” of a more spiritual imagination, have provided retreats in which spirits,
[Page 109]
Assoiled from all encumbrance of the time, may rest and be thankful. A perfect poet ought to discharge both those great offices of poetry. To a limited extent the greatest have done so; but even in their case the balance has ever preponderated in one direction or the other.
In Greece, as in England, those two species of poetry coexisted; but in the former neither of them connected itself much with materials derived from any foreign country. No region more beautiful than Greece could then be conceived of; and the Greek poet could only forsake the company of its heroes for that of its gods. But in our northern regions, which, on emerging from barbarism, found the ancient literature a perfect work imperfectly explored, the South has always been regarded with feelings akin to those entertained by the Greek for the fabled Hesperia of the West. It was a region of beauty and delight on which the imagination might rest half-way to heaven, —an asylum which combined the solidities of this earth with the ideal perfection of worlds beyond ours. The beauty of the southern countries, their remoteness, and their ancient fame, favoured the illusion; and the imagination of England was further drawn to them by the indirect attraction of those other arts which had been carried to perfection in the South alone. The southern mind, moreover, is more inventive than that of the North, though less thoughtful and imaginative; and, as a consequence, Italian and Spanish “Novelle” supplied a plot to half our British
[Page 110]
dramas,—a circumstance too commonly ascribed to the single fact that on the revival of letters the literature of the South had earliest sprung into existence. All these influences imparted a character distinctly southern to that school of English Poetry which was inspired rather by the love of the beautiful than by national associations, as both advanced to their development.
It was in Shakespeare and Milton that the two great schools found their chief representatives. The former is the greatest of national poets, though he sometimes forsook the national for the ideal department of song; and Milton is not a national poet, although (his ideal resulting as much from his religious bias as from his imagination) his poetry derived from the stormy Puritanism of his land and day a reality rare in the ideal school. This distinction between the character of the two poets is illustrated by the different reception their works have met. Shakespeare's sympathies were keenly native; and he has therefore ever been a favourite with the people. He is above their appreciation, indeed, but not beyond their love. His dramas have many planes of interest, which underlie each other like the concentric layers of bark produced by the annual growth of a tree; and while the most philosophic eye cannot penetrate to the inmost, the most superficial is pleased with that which lies outside. Where any love of the drama remains, Shakespeare is enjoyed even by the most homely audience. But if any one were to submit to such an audience a page
[Page 111]
of the Paradise Lost , far from being received like the Rhapsodist of old, the Ballad-singer, or the Methodist Preacher, it would effectually disperse the crowd. The audience which Milton demanded was “fit though few”: Shakespeare demanded none; but if people came, he probably thought “the more the merrier.” The latter wrote for the stage, but seldom was at the trouble of publishing his plays: the former prescribed for himself a choral audience consisting of grave divines, sage patriots, and virtuous citizens; and when this selected audience hissed him, as occasionally happened, he cursed them to their faces in Hebrew and in Greek—as “asses, apes, and dogs,” whose portion ought to be with the schismatics who had “railed at Latona's twin-born progeny!”
It is not, however, its deficient popularity so much as its subject and its form which proves that Milton's great work is not a national poem, high as it ranks among our national triumphs. If that mind had remained with him, which was his when English landscape supplied the scenery of his Allegro , and Christian theology inspired the moral teaching of his Comus , he would probably have fulfilled his youthful aspiration, and celebrated Britain's mythic hero, Arthur; but instead of the great romance of the North, he wrote its religious epic. Some will affirm that he illustrated in that work his age if not his country. His age, however, gave him an impulse rather than materials. Puritanism became transmuted, as it passed through his capacious and ardent mind,
[Page 112]
into a faith Hebraic in its austere spirit,—a faith that sympathised indeed with the Iconoclastic zeal which distinguished the anti-Catholic and anti-patristic theology of the age, but held little consent with any of the complex definitions at that time insisted on as the symbols of Protestant orthodoxy. Had the Puritan spirit been as genuine a thing as the spirit of liberty which accompanied it; had it been such as their reverence for Milton makes many suppose it to have been, the mood would not so soon have yielded to the licentiousness that followed the Restoration. Milton laboured as a patriot-partizan while a field of labour was open to him: he then turned again to his true greatness. The dust of the conflict had fallen; and the mountain heights shone out once more from the serene distance: once more he confronted the mighty works of ancient genius. They pleased him still, from their severity and their simplicity; but they did not satisfy him—because they wanted elevation. In his Paradise Lost he raised and endeavoured to spiritualise the antique epic. There are many who will always regard St. Peter's temple in the air as the first of architectural monuments. The admirers of the classic will, however, feel that the amplitude and height of the wondrous dome are no sufficient substitue for that massive simplicity and breadth of effect which belong to the Parthenon; while those who revere our cathedrals will maintain that it lacks the variety, the mystery, the aspiration, and the infinitude which characterise the Christian architecture of
[Page 113]
the North. On analogous grounds the more devoted admirers of Homer and of Shakespeare will ever be dissatisfied with Milton's work, however they may venerate his genius. It is obviously composite in its character—the necessary result of its uniting a Hebraic spirit with a classic form. Dante, like Milton, uses the Greek mythology freely; considering it, no doubt, as part of that “inheritance of the Heathen,” into possession of which Christendom had a right to enter; but he uses it as a subordinate ornament, and in matters of mere detail. His poem is a Vision, not an Epic, that vision of supernatural truth, of Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise, which passed before the eyes of the mediæval Church as she looked up in nocturnal vigil; not the mundane circle of life and experience, of action and of passion, exhibited in its completeness, and contemplated with calm satisfaction by a Muse that looks down from heaven. But a mystic subject, open rather to apprehension than comprehension, would not have contented Milton, who, with his classical predilections, had early laid it down as a canon that poetry should be “simple, sensuous, and impassioned,” a statement of the utmost importance where justly applicable, but by no means embracing the whole truth. To him the classic model supplied, not the adornment of his poem, but its structure and form. The soul that wielded that mould was, if not exactly the spirit of Christianity, at least a religious spirit—profound, zealous, and self-reverent—as analogous, perhaps, in its temper to the warlike religion of
[Page 114]
the Eastern Prophet, as to the traditional Faith of the second Dispensation. Such was the mighty fabric which, aloof and in his native land an exile, Milton raised; not perfect, not homogeneous, not in any sense a national work, but the greatest of all those works which prove that a noble poem may be produced with little aid from local sympathies, and none from national traditions.
From the earliest period of our literature we have possessed the two schools, which culminated in Shakespeare and in Milton. In Chaucer the national element greatly preponderated: it reigns almost alone in many of the Canterbury Tales, especially in the humorous; but in several, of which the moral tone is higher and the execution more delicate, a southern spirit prevails. Of these his “Second Nonne's Tale,” embalming the legend of St. Cecilia, is a beautiful example, illustrating, as it does, that moral influence of which the origin eluded the eye, like the invisible garland of the saint,—that influence which was exhaled from the life and manners of the first Christians, and through which, in a large part, their religion was diffused. The national element of our poetry, too, asserted itself almost exclusively in our historical ballads, that exquisite series, the musical echo of so much of our history. Surrey and Wyatt, in no slight degree, represented that Italian-Gothic school of which Spenser may be considered as the great representative. In him the spirit of chivalry elevated the love of the beautiful; and both, while often ennobled by a
[Page 115]
meditative piety, were enriched by all the gentler associations of classical song. He was a man of a far graver mind than belonged to any of his models; and we miss in him the buoyant gaiety which animates the poets of the South; but such deficiencies were amply atoned for by that profoundly contemplative spirit which pervades his poetry. His hymns on “Heavenly Love” and “Heavenly Beauty” are poetic specimens of the Platonic moral philosophy; and we can nowhere meet an exposition of the Christian Religion in its completeness and proportions, doctrinal, devotional, and practical, more searching while so brief as exists in the tenth canto of his First Book , describing the visit of the Red-Cross Knight to the “House of Holiness.” In the Faery Queen , indeed, we find the essence of the prose romances of the Middle Ages—as we find the essence of their theologians in Dante. Ariosto is neither more various nor more picturesque than the English poet, while in sincerity, tenderness, and elevation, he is immeasurably inferior; nor is that imaginative love-sentiment which, rather than the passion itself, was the theme of the ideal poets, celebrated with more grace, refinement, and sweetness, in the sonnets of Petrarca than in those of Spenser. Spenser's fairy-land will never be much frequented by those whose sympathies are exclusively with Action, Passion, and Character. But with poetic students of another class, who, if they have advanced less in the lore of life, have wandered less far from the breast of the Muses; with those by
[Page 116]
whom ideal beauty, generous sentiment, rich imagery, “fancies chaste and noble,” harmonious numbers, and a temperament of poetry steeped in the fountains of pleasure, but irradiating them with its own purity,— with those by whom such qualities are cherished, the poetry of Spenser must ever remain a favourite haunt. It more resembles the Italian Gothic than a classic temple which charms and rests the eye by the perfection of its proportions: yet to it also belongs, in its several parts, a southern definiteness. It is a forest palace,—half natural, half artificial: we wander through groves as regular as galleries; and catch glimpses of openings like stately halls dismantled,— but our foot is ever upon flowers; and the moonlight of the allegory favours the illusion.
From the chivalrous paradise of Spenser's Faery Queen to Milton's Paradise Lost the two schools of English poetry maintained a friendly rivalry. Both sources of inspiration contended at times in the same author, even when a dramatist. Marlow, in his classical narrative poem “Hero and Leander”; Shakespeare, in his “Rape of Lucrece” and his “Venus and Adonis”; Fletcher, in his “Faithful Shepherdess”; Shirley, in his “Narcissus and Echo,” are southern, not only in their subject but in their mode of treating it. In Brown's “Britannia's Pastorals,” a poem full of beauty, the classic spirit reigns almost alone. The scenery itself is classical, though the author was probably never out of England; and its “silver streams” and “pleasant meads” are never depressed
[Page 117]
by the shade of northern mountains or clouds. The sonnets of Drummond abound in an Italian beauty; as indeed do many of Daniel's, whose other writings are characterised by an English robustness and thoughtfulness. The exquisite fragments which, in his swift and brief career, were carelessly shaken from Sidney's affluent genius, are as full of the southern inspiration as the morning dew-drops are of light; and in Lovelace, Suckling, Carew, as well as other lyric poets of their time, we find a terseness and lighthearted grace which are not of northern origin. In Herrick the southern spirit becomes again the spirit of the antique. In the very constitution of his imagination he was a Greek; yet he sang in no falsetto key: his thoughts were instinct with the true classical spirit; and it was, as it were, by a process of translation that he recast them in English words. It is to this circumstance that we are to attribute his occasional reprehensible license.
With the exception of Milton, the period that succeeded the Restoration was as fatal to the ideal as to the national school of English poetry. The religious sentiment had bled wellnigh to death, through the wounds of a society cut up with sects and schisms. The political enthusiasm had burned out. The sublime had been changed into the ridiculous; the performance had mocked the conception; and if Milton's majestic prose treatises had sounded the Prologue, the Epilogue of the Tragi-comedy was furnished by the shrewd and thoroughly English
[Page 118]
comment of Butler's Hudibras . Cromwell passed away; and the strong but gloomy world his shoulders had supported, fell with him. As if the Puritan prophets had but prophesied in somnambulism, as if the nation had but in hypochondria fancied itself a Levitical community, as if their lofty Hebraic aspirations had been but an ethical “renaissance” or “the nympholepsy of some fond despair,” the work of their hands melted strangely away before the eyes, and with the seeming consent of the English people!
The cavaliers had again their day; but their success turned out likewise a failure. The king had been brought back; but he could not believe in himself— and the ancient loyalty was no more. A less imaginative age had succeeded, and the riot of sense were called in, to supply the place of spiritual illusions dispelled. The degradations of society infected literature. The revel subsided; but the debauch of the night left the head giddy and the stomach weak in the morning; and the epicurean had soured into the cynic. That period was succeeded by a still colder one. Its chief political work, the Revolution, was effected in business-like fashion,—but with little on either side of that faith or hope which had elevated the earlier struggle. Its theology held equally in suspicion whatever was passionate and whatever was traditional: its philosophy repudiated abstractions and à priori views; and its arts lacked the fervour alike of ideal conceptions and of home-bred affections. High aspirations and national recollections faded alike; poetry necessarily
[Page 119]
became imitative; and the Anglo-Gallican school grew up. The silver age of English poetry was adorned with writers of admirable abilities; of whom Dryden was the greatest in mental power, while Pope has left behind him the most perfect works. Conventional manners, satire, and if not moral philosophy, at least moral disquisition, supplied their cheap materials to that school; and in the absence of a creative spirit or a shaping art, its chief attractions were found in its executive skill, and a style accomplished, masculine, and pointed. It died out soon, however, for it had no root. Its classical illusions, taken at second hand, had never breathed a genuine classical spirit; and its disquisitions gradually degenerated into metrical treatises on botany, hunting, or medicine!
In conjunction with stronger political interests and deeper feelings on moral and religious subjects, Poetry gradually revived. It exhibited from the first a native origin that attested its authenticity, and in time it developed an ideal aim. The former was marked by its fidelity to Nature, and its frequent reference to the rural manners of England. The nature which Thomson describes is living Nature, and the blood flows freely in her veins; but a refined appreciation of the graceful and the poetical he lacked; and the deficiency which makes itself ridiculous in the clumsy handling of his “Musidora” and other narratives, exists also in his delineations of scenery. The landscapes of Thomson, like those of Rubens, are sensual, though in each case we remark that quality
[Page 120]
less than when the subject treated is a higher one, and in each the want of refinement and spirituality is compensated by a rich combination of less exalted merits. The poet and the painter alike present us, in their landscapes, with the “fat of the land”; their substantial plains and well-watered meads remind us that they were intended to be meat for man and for beast; and whatever they may lack, they are not deficient in reality. With an idyllic a moral poetry rose up. The moral meditations of Young had comprised much vigorous declamation of native English growth. Cowper, a far greater poet, expressed in purer and simpler language thoughts with more of substantial worth, as well as a strain of sentiment, manly, religious, and gravely affectionate. In him, too, we find an admirable fidelity to outward nature in detail; although with her grander forms, unendeared by association, he had little sympathy; while ideal representations of scenery are no more to be found in his poetry than ideal conceptions of character.
If the poetry of Cowper belongs to our national school, that of Burns is yet more racy of the soil. He was more fortunately circumstanced for poetry, though he had more to contend with. The period at which he lived furnished materials sufficiently poetical, when presented to his keen insight and vivid sensibilities; and Burns was luckily without that smattering of learning which often leads men from what surrounds them, without enabling them truly to appreciate the
[Page 121]
spirit of another age. He felt deeply; and he affected nothing foreign to his genius. Song and ballad, and light tale and humorous dialogue, the forms of composition with which the neighbourhood was familiar,—with these, while he “unlocked his heart” he also interpreted that of his country. Most of those qualities which were distributed among his countrymen met in his larger being, or were embraced by his sympathies. It is not chiefly the romantic side of the Scotch character which was represented in Burns,—its imagination, its patriotism, its zealous affectionateness, its love of the legendary, the marvellous and the ancient,—that part, in fact, which belongs most to the highlands: he was more amply furnished with the stronger lowland qualities,— sense, independence, courageous perseverance, shrewdness, and humour, a retentive heart, and a mind truthful alike when fully expressed or when partially reserved. These qualities were united in his abundant nature; and his poetic temperament freed them from the limitations which belong to every character formed upon a local type. The consequence is that his songs are sung at the hearth and on the mountain-side; his pathos is felt and his humour applauded by the village circle; his sharp descriptions and shrewd questions on grave matters are treated as indulgently by ministers of the “National Assembly,” the “Free Kirk,” and “orthodox dissenters,” as Boccaccio's stories once were by the Italian clergy; and for the lonely traveller from the South the one small volume
[Page 122]
which contains his works is the best of guidebooks, —not indeed to noted spots, legendary or famed for beauty,—but to the manners, the moral soul, and the heart of the Scotch people. Burns is emphatically the most national of poets.
This brief retrospect has brought down nearly to our own times its imperfect sketch of the two main schools into which our poetic literature may be divided; and it will be perceived that both these schools have their origin in the imaginative and social instincts of man, which occupy themselves alike with what is above him, and what is around him, and no less in that special gift of high poetry—viz. versatility, which enables it to provide food for both of those two cravings. This truth derives a historical confirmation from the fact that both schools became extinct together, when English poetry had declined into mere imitation; and that whenever the poetic genius of England has been most powerfully developed, both have flourished together—united like the Latin and Saxon elements of our compound language. The poetic mind of England, on its revival towards the end of the last century, again, as of old, manifested itself in the form of two schools which, with much in common, still represented, notwithstanding, the northern and southern hemispheres of our literature. Wordsworth and Coleridge were the chief examples of our national school; though in Coleridge the national frequently passed into a mystical inspiration; Shelley and Keats of the
[Page 123]
ideal. These were far from being among the popular poets of their time; but they were the most characteristic, and they have exercised the most enduring influence.
The word School is an inadequate one, but it suffices for the convenience of classification. The growths of the same region, however diverse in detail, have yet characteristic features in common; and it is thus also with the growths of the mind. In Coleridge's poetry the reasoning faculty is chiefly that of contemplation and intuition; in Wordsworth's, the meditative and the discursive prevail; but to both a predominance of the thoughtful is common; and in that respect both poets not only illustrate the peculiar genius of their country, but are also fit interpreters of the spirit of their age, as distinguished from the fashion of the moment, and from its unspiritual and materialistic tendencies. In the poetry of both, little change took place except that of growth. Till their genius had found out its own nature and scope its strength remained undeveloped. In both these poets we find a deep-seated patriotism, a reverence for the hearth, a love of local traditions, an English enjoyment of nature, a humanity, mournful not seldom, and even in its cheerfulness grave—as though cheerfulness were less an instinct than a virtue or a duty. Most of these qualities exist also in the poetry of Southey, in which, with less both of thought and imagination, and a style less pregnant and felicitous, there is more of invention, and a more determined
[Page 124]
purpose. It is thus that with many and important differences poets whose individuality is complete admit of being classed together. The same fact is true with respect to Shelley, Keats, Landor, and others who might be named,—poets in whom, though their diversities were great, a southern temperament and classical ideal predominated.
It was in temperament chiefly that Shelley belonged to the classical school. In intellect he was metaphysical and abstract, to a degree scarcely compatible with the sensuous character of Greek poetry. His imagination likewise, admirable as it was, differed essentially from that of the classic poets. It was figurative rather than plastic. In place of moulding the subject of a poem as a whole, it scattered itself abroad in the splendour of countless metaphors, seen sometimes one through another, like a taper discerned through a taper. A beautiful image had for him an attraction independently of the thought it illustrated; and, once brought within the sphere of its attraction, his fancy fluttered around it, bewildered and intoxicated. A thought had for him also a value irrespectively of the place which it held in his poetic theme: he prized it as truth; he prized it yet more as knowledge; and with such thoughts his poetry, at once subtly and expansively intellectual, is charged to a degree almost unprecedented. The lamentable errors which lurked in the first principles upon which he had so recklessly precipitated himself (errors, however, hardly worse and less insidious than
[Page 125]
many that lurk in grave treatises welcomed with little mistrust at the present day) of course infected his results. The conclusions, however, at which he arrived, were logical; and those who can learn from errors as well as truths, will find a sad instruction in the coherency of his reasonings, and a comparative safety in the audacity with which they are expressed. If, for instance, we adopt the opinion,—which is a suppressed premise in all his speculations—namely, that there exists no moral evil in the nature of man except that which finds its way there accidentally,—it will be hard to avoid conclusions analogous to his, respecting both religion and government. The seed at least of such principles will be planted, and their growth will depend on the ardour of the climate, and the fertility of the soil. It is only with his poetry, however, that we are now concerned. Its abstruse as well as imaginative character would have rendered it almost unintelligible, if he had not possessed, though apparently by nature rather than by study, a singular gift of language. His diction, which was searching, vigorous, various, arranged itself into periods, scholastic in the skill that joined clause on to clause, and the varied melody of which at once discriminated the meaning and enforced the sentiment. The same dialectical precision gave force and dignity to his style, whether he wrote in verse or prose; and imparted to both the utmost clearness which the subject matter, the recondite thought, and the redundant imagery allowed of. This faculty was
[Page 126]
eminently Grecian; and the very sound of that noble language, which was not so much a study to him as a delight, will often be found in his verse. He reminds us of the Greek inspiration chiefly by the skill with which he illustrated the ancient mythology. In his Prometheus Unbound his classical vein is too often checked by political or metaphysical disquisitions often inappropriately introduced; but in it, and in the choruses of his “Hellas,” there is an Æschylean energy; and many of the classical touches in his “Adonais” are admirably true. It is, however, in his minor poems that he most belongs to the South. His “Hymn of Apollo” and “Hymn of Pan” are full of the musical hilarity of the Greeks; his “Ode to Naples” is a true choral ode of compact structure and concentrated purpose; and his “Arethusa,” the metre of which sweeps along like a vernal torrent, and in which the nymph and the element she presides over are with such skill blended and alternated, proves that Shelley's versatile temperament included that Protean power by which the Greeks dramatised Nature and humanised all her forms.
In few writers are we more instructively reminded than in Shelley, of that living bond between the Poet and the Man, without which poetry would hold little inward significance and moral power. His temperament was of the most sensitive order. All temperaments, doubtless, except the phlegmatic, can lend themselves to poetic purposes; but while that one which unites the saturnine with the impassioned
[Page 127]
produces poetry often, as it were, by disease, poetry is the natural expression of one like his,—sanguine, and organised with the utmost of nervous susceptibility. The former quality is marked by that soaring hope with which he watches the destinies of man, heralding the promise of a future on which he—the professed enemy of Faith—had too credulous a dependence. The second we trace in the childlike wonder with which he regards the daily face of Nature; all objects, from the far-off peak to the flower at the mountain's base, wearing for him a radiance, as if the glorious apparition of the earth had but just bounded into existence. His disposition also, as it is described by his friends, cordial and full of sweetness, though threatening if assailed,—impetuous, yet shy at intervals, and when shy, opening no more,—makes itself felt throughout his poetry in many a passage, the sentiment of which, if deficient in robustness, is alive with pathetic tenderness. His personality, too, affected as it was by untoward accidents, stands up in his works conspicuous, for evil and for good. His poetry, in truth, is the embodiment of a social creed, not only dogmatic and exclusive but aggressive. His song is no voice from Nature's recesses, sent forth to indicate the whereabout of sweet and secret passion; still less is it the orderly array of thought with which the ambitious scholar studiously adorns his theme and commends his name to posterity. It is the chant of the bard, or rather the warnote of the prophet-chief. In the solitudes of the soul, and when most “hidden in the light of thought,”
[Page 128]
Shelley was a public man—bent on political designs, such designs as even now convulse the world. His spirit did not, indeed, like Milton's, “sit in the pomp of singing robes,” but, to use his own expression, “hovered in verse o'er his accustomed prey.” In so estimating himself, he did not mistake either his vocation or his abilities; but he greatly mistook the subject and himself. He taught when he had but begun to think, and before he had begun to learn; and the perverse error which blinded his eyes was a snare also to his feet, and made void one-half of the work of his hands. Seldom have such gifts been so abused. He was strong in zeal, but weak through self-confidence; he rushed into the fight without armour though with boundless courage; and with the weapon of an idle and ignorant scorn he struck, not only at abuses and corruptions, which such as he are sent to plague and to destroy, but at truths older than either science or song, and higher than his highest hopes for man.
The errors of Shelley as regards religion were not such as a true charity either conceals or palliates. The infidelity of the mind has its root oftentimes in the will; and in those cases the gravity and the danger of such error cannot be exaggerated; but few will pronounce on its origin in individual instances; nor do its effects admit of being treated of in a few words. Partly to account for his opinions, and partly in the passion of the hour, vices were imputed to Shelley from which he was remarkably free. To one who appreciates his poetry, such charges could present little
[Page 129]
of plausibility, since a nature, however darkened, yet neither corrupt nor insincere, must be the basis of works like his. One of the lessons which we have to learn from Shelley is the insufficiency of moral aspirations or beautiful dispositions alone, and in the absence of religious faith, to realise their highest aims whether in life or in literature. It is with the latter only that we are here concerned.
With great moral energies he had great moral deficiencies. Few men possessed more than he that high faculty of admiration, through which men learn so much and become so much. He gazed in admiration at all things, whether the triumphs of the human mind or the commonest achievements of mechanic skill; yet in all his poetry we find no trace of his having possessed the kindred, but nobler habit —that of veneration. And yet, to be without veneration is to be shut out from a complete world,—the world moreover which contains that in which we live. The spirit of his poetry often looks up in wonder and glances around in love, and flings its gaze far forward in anger or in scorn; but its eyes are never cast reverently downwards,—and therefore, even in its zeal for truth, it overruns the soil in which truth is sown. He had an intellectual defect which corresponded with this moral one. He had no power of suspending his judgment. He could not doubt wisely and provisionally, or believe tentatively. His infidelity itself was in part an inverted faith in certain ethical principles with which he rashly assumed
[Page 130]
Christianity to be at war; and in part that undiscriminating hatred “of priestcraft” to which the fanatics of Free Thought are subject. His mind was extraordinarily keen, but deficient in breadth. Such minds, especially when irradiated by an imagination neither a law to itself nor recognising a higher law, admit no twilight of intelligence. All their thoughts stand out as realities, until eclipsed by rival thoughts. This onesidedness of mind accounts in part for the fact, otherwise inexplicable, of his having denied, at an age when others are at worst but doubters,—and obtruded rather than confessed his unbelief. His temper also was impetuous, to a degree which, while it misapplied his reasonings, deprived his poetry of that perfect sanity which we find in the great masters. He was aware that it lacked self-possession and serenity. It lacked it because his whole nature—constitutional, intellectual, and moral—was deficient in gravity. He wrote moreover ambitiously, and with too much effort; and his genius was to a slight degree sophisticated by egotism. The ideal of a poet often includes something of himself; and Shelley's nature, in its militant capacity, is indicated in two of his chief works, his Prometheus and his Revolt of Islam : but his “Alastor,” “Prince Athanase,” and many of his minor poems, prove that he was fond of dwelling upon it in other relations, and in a spirit of anatomical scrutiny. We should err, however, in our estimate of Shelley's genius if we did not allow for the degree in which its products were modified by circumstance. Ill-health had preyed
[Page 131]
on him till his natural sensibility had been heightened into nervous irritability. This circumstance, together with the belief that his time in this world was short, made him overtask his faculties, which were thus ever in a hectic state of excitement. The abstract habit of his mind gave an additional daring to his conclusions; and that habit was increased by the fact that between him and his countrymen there was war. Isolation indeed always intensifies, for good or for evil, the energies of speculative men; whose powers are at once tamed down and enriched when merged in friendly communion with other minds. In the case of Shelley it also left his poetic education incomplete. He had carefully fed his mind on all things beautiful and sublime; nor had the influences of study, philosophical, scientific, and political, been wanting to him; but living remote from practical life, his genius lacked one species of nourishment, the knowledge that comes by experience. It had never been disciplined.
To estimate justly the faults as well as the merits of great minds is a duty which we owe not only to truth and to ourselves, but to them. It is only when we know what hindrances were opposed to their greatness by the forfeits exacted from their faults, that we can know to what that greatness might, without such obstacles, have amounted. We can but guess what would have been the mature works of such a mind as Shelley's, when that planet-birth had cooled down sufficiently to produce healthy growths. The manhood of human life is still but the boyhood of
[Page 132]
the Poet; yet how much did he not leave behind in his brief span! There is scarcely one of his larger works which is not a storehouse of condensed thought and beauty—whatever may be its faults in the way of unreality or exaggeration. His “Hymn on Intellectual Beauty,” his odes to “Liberty,” to “Naples,” to “The West Wind,” his “Cloud,” his “Skylark,” and many a choral ode in his Lyrical Dramas, are in themselves a conclusive answer to a charge frequently brought against English poetry, namely, that it has seldom soared into the highest region of lyrical inspiration; and in his shorter pieces there are numerous snatches of song to which the term “essential poetry” would not be misapplied,—poems not only of magnetic power, but as flawless as the diamond, and in their minuteness as perfect as the berry on the tree or the bubble on the fountain. Great indeed is the bequest which Shelley has left us: and it is not without somewhat of remorseful sorrow that we remember what life gave him in return. Looking on what is past and gone through the serene medium of distance, all petty details vanish from our view, and a few great realities stand bare. In sad retrospection we look forth—and we see a man and a life! A young man, noble in genius, in heart ardent, full of emotion and affection, his whole being expanded to all genial and cheering influences as “a vine-leaf in the sun,”—such a being we behold, endowed richly with the treasured stores of old learning and cherished hopes for future man. With the joy of a strong swimmer he flings himself
[Page 133]
upon the stream of life, and finds himself bleeding and broken on the rocks it covers! To say “it was his own fault” is a mode of disposing of the matter rather compendious than satisfactory. For his errors he is answerable at another tribunal than ours. The age which partakes of and fosters such errors, and others more sordid, may find time to remember his sufferings as well. Through trials not the less severe because not unprovoked, he fought his way, not, alas, in peace of conscience, yet certainly with high courage and quenchless hope. He deemed that he had lived long. But he was only in his twenty-ninth year when the Mediterranean waves closed above his head. A sad career was his. He had his intellectual raptures, and he had friends—few of them worthy of him; several of them deeply indebted to him; one of them fatal to him, because the supplanter of his youthful faith—Godwin.
The genius of Keats was Grecian to a far higher degree than that of Shelley. His sense of beauty was profounder still; and was accompanied by that in which Shelley's poetry was deficient—Repose. Tranquillity is no high merit if it be attained at the expense of ardour; but the two qualities are not incompatible. The ardour of Shelley's nature shows itself in a vehement evolution of thought and succession of imagery,— that of Keats in a still intensity. The former was a fiery enthusiasm, the latter was a profound passion. Rushing through regions of unlimited thought, Shelley could but throw out hints which are often suggestive
[Page 134]
only. His designs are always outline sketches, and the lines of light in which they are drawn remind us of that “Temple of a Spirit” described by him, the walls of which revealed
A tale of passionate change divinely taught,
Which in their winged dance unconscious Genii wrought.
Truth and action may be thus emblemed; but beauty is a thing of shape and of colour, not of light merely, and rest is essential to it. That delighted rapidity of interwoven thought, in which Shelley exulted, was foreign to the deeper temperament of Keats. One of his canons of poetry was, that “its touches of beauty should never be half-way, thereby making the reader breathless instead of content. The rise, the progress, the setting of imagery, should, like the sun, come naturally to the poet, shine over him, and set soberly, although in magnificence, leaving him in the luxury of twilight.” He disliked all poetical surprises, and affirmed that poetry “should strike the reader as a wording of his own highest thoughts, and appear almost a remembrance.” Shelley's genius, like the eagle he describes,
Runs down the slanted sunlight of the dawn.
But Beauty moves ever in curved lines, like the celestial bodies, and even in movement simulates rest. Beauty was the adornment of Shelley's poetry; it was the very essence of Keats's. There is in his poetry not only a constant enjoyment of the beautiful, —there is a thirst for it never to be satisfied, of which
[Page 135]
we are reminded by his portrait. Shelley admired the beautiful, Keats was absorbed in it; and admired it no more than an infant admires the mother at whose breast he feeds. That deep absorption excluded all consciousness of self,—nay, every intrusion of alien thought; and while the genius of Shelley, too often like a double-reflecting crystal, returned a twofold image, that poetic vision which day by day grew clearer before Keats was an image of Beauty only, whole and unbroken. There is a peculiar significance in the expression, “A child of song,” as applied to him. Not only his outward susceptibilities retained throughout the freshness of infancy, but his whole nature possessed that integrity which belongs but to childhood, or to the purest and most energetic genius. When the poetic mood was not on him, though his heart was full of manly courage, there was much of a child's waywardness, want of self-command, and inexperienced weakness in his nature. His poetry is never, like some of Shelley's, juvenile . It is either the stammer of the child or the “large utterance of the early gods.”
Keats possessed eminently the rare gift of invention —as is proved by his narrative poems. He had also, though without Shelley's constructive skill as to the architecture of sentences, a depth, significance, and power of diction, which even the imitational affectation to be found in his earliest productions could not disguise. He instinctively selects the words which exhibit the more characteristic qualities of the objects
[Page 136]
described. The most remarkable property of his poetry, however, is the degree in which it combines the sensuous with the ideal. The sensuousness of Keats's poetry might have degenerated into the sensual, but for the ideality that exalted it, and by the absence of which his imitators have discredited him,—a union which existed in consequence of a connection not less intimate between his sensitive temperament and his wide imagination. Perhaps we have had no other instance of a bodily constitution so poetical. With him all things were more or less sensational; his mental faculties being, as it were, extended throughout the sensitive part of his nature— as the sense of sight, according to the theory of the Mesmerists, is diffused throughout the body on some occasions of abnormal excitement. His body seemed to think; and, on the other hand, he sometimes appears hardly to have known whether he possessed aught but body. His whole nature partook of a sensational character in this respect, namely, that every thought and sentiment came upon him with the suddenness, and appealed to him with the reality of a sensation. It is not the lowest only, but also the loftiest part of our being to which this character of unconsciousness and immediateness belongs. Intutitions and aspirations are spiritual sensations; while the physical perceptions and appetites are bodily intuitions. Instinct itself is but a lower form of inspiration; and the highest virtue advances to a spiritual instinct. It was in the intermediate part of
[Page 137]
our nature that Keats had but a small part. His mind had little affinity with whatever belonged to the region of the merely probable. To his heart, kindly as he was, everything in the outer world seemed foreign, except that which for the time engrossed it. His nature was Epicurean at one side, Platonist at the other—and both by irresistible instinct. The Aristotelian definition, the Stoical dogma, the Academical disputation, were to him all alike unmeaning. His poetic gift was not a separate faculty which he could exercise or restrain as he pleased, and direct to whatever object he chose. It was when “by predominance of thought oppressed” that there fell on him that still, poetic vision of Truth and Beauty which only thus truly comes. The “burden” of his inspiration came to him in leni aurâ , like the visits of the gods; yet his fragile nature bent before it like a reed. It was not shaken or disturbed, but wielded by it wholly.
To the sluggish temperaments of ordinary men excitement is pleasure. The fervour of Keats preyed upon him with a pain from which Shelley was protected by a mercurial mobility; and it was with the languor of rest that he associated the idea of enjoyment. How much is implied in this description of exhaustion! “Pleasure has no show of enticement, and Pain no unbearable frown; neither Poetry, nor Ambition, nor Love have any alertness of countenance; as they pass me by they seem rather like three figures on a Greek vase—two men and a woman, whom no one but myself could distinguish in their disguisement.
[Page 138]
This is the only happiness ; and is a rare instance of advantage in the body overcoming the mind.” 2 A nobler relief was afforded to him by that versatility which made him live in the objects around him. It is thus that he writes: “I scarcely remember counting on any happiness. I look not for it, if it be not in the present hour. Nothing startles me beyond the moment. The setting sun will always set me to rights; or if a sparrow were before my window, I take part in its existence, and pick with it about the gravel.” 3 Elsewhere he speaks thus of that form of poetic genius which belonged to him, and which he contrasts with that of the “egotistical sublime.” “It has no self. It is everything and nothing—it has no character—it enjoys light and shade—it lives in gusts, be it foul or fair, high or low, rich or poor, mean or elevated—it has as much delight in conceiving an Iago as an Imogen.” 4 In this passage, as elsewhere, he seems to confound mental versatility with the absence of personal character. That versatility of imagination is however by no means incompatible with depth of nature and tenacity of purpose as is remarked by Mr. Milnes, whose life of Keats is enriched with many passages of sound criticism. In “Endymion,” Keats reminds us of Chaucer and slightly of Spenser; in “Hyperion” of Milton; in his “Cap and Bells” of Ariosto; and in his drama, the last act of which is very fine, of Ford. Mr. Milnes remarks, with reference to the last two works, that Keats's
[Page 139]
occasional resemblance to other poets, though it proves that his genius was still in a growing state, in no degree detracts from his originality: he did not imitate others so much as emulate them; and no matter whom he may resemble, he is still always himself.
The character of Keats's intellect corresponded well with his large imagination and versatile temperament. He had not Shelley's manifold and sleepless faculties, but he had the larger mind. Keats could neither form systems nor dispute about them; though germs of deep and original thought are to be found scattered in his most careless letters. The two friends used sometimes to contend as to the relative worth of truth and of beauty. Beauty is the visible embodiment of a certain species of truth; and it was with that species that the mind of Keats, which always worked in and through the sensibilities, held conscious relations. He fancied that he had no access to philosophy, because he was averse to definitions and systems, and sometimes saw glimpses of truth in adverse systems. His mind had itself much of that “negative capability” which he remarked on as a large part of Shakespeare's greatness, and which he described as a power “of being in uncertainties, mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason,” 5 —a capability perhaps inconceivable to Shelley's militant nature. There is assuredly such a thing as philosophical doubt, as well as of philosophical belief: it is the doubt which belongs to the mind, not to the will; to which
[Page 140]
we are not drawn by love of singularity, and from which we are not scared by nervous tremors; the doubt which is not the denial of anything, so much as the proving of all things; the doubt of one who would rather walk in mystery than in false lights, who waits that he may win, and who prefers the broken fragments of truth to the imposing completeness of a theory. Such is that uncertainty of a large mind, which a small mind cannot understand; and such no doubt was, in part, that of Keats, who was fond of saying that “every point of thought is the centre of an intellectual world.” The passive part of intellect, the powers of susceptibility and appreciation, Keats possessed to an almost infinite degree; but in this respect his mind appears to have been cast in a feminine mould; and that masculine energy which Shakespeare combined with a susceptive temperament unfathomably deep, in him either existed deficiently, or had not had time for its development.
If we turn from the poet to the man, from the works to the life, the retrospect is less painful in the case of Keats than of Shelley. He also suffered from ill-health, and from a temperament which, when its fine edge had to encounter the jars of life, was subject to a morbid despondency; but he had many sources of enjoyment, and his power of enjoyment was extraordinary. His disposition, which was not only sweet and simple, but tolerant and kindly, procured and preserved for him many friends. It has been commonly supposed that adverse criticism had wounded him deeply and in an unworthy manner; but the charge
[Page 141]
receives a complete refutation from a letter written on the occasion referred to. In it he says: “Praise or blame has but a momentary effect on the man whose love of beauty in the abstract makes him a severe critic on his own works. ... I will write independently. I have written independently without judgment . I may write independently, and with judgment , hereafter. The Genius of Poetry must work out its own salvation in a man. ... I was never afraid of failure.”
There are, however, trials in the world from which the most imaginative cannot escape; and which are more real than those which self-love alone can make important to us. Keats's sensibility amounted to disease. “I would reject,” he writes, “a Petrarchal coronation—on account of my dying day—and because women have cancers!” A few months later, after visiting the house of Burns, he wrote thus: “His misery is a dead weight on the nimbleness of one's quill: I tried to forget it ... it won't do. ... We can see, horribly clear, in the works of such a man, his whole life, as if we were God's spies.” 6 It was this extreme sensibility, not less than his ideal tendencies, which made him shrink with prescient fear from the world of actual things. Reality frowned above him like a cliff seen by a man in a nightmare dream. It fell on him at last! The most interesting of all his letters is that to his brother, 7 in which he, with little anticipation of results, describes his first meeting with the Oriental beauty who soon after became the object of his passion.
[Page 142]
In love he had always been, in one sense; and personal love was but the devotion to that in a concentrated form which he had previously and more safely yearned towards as a loveliness scattered and diffused. He loved and he won; but death cheated him of the prize. Tragical indeed were his sufferings during the months of his decline. In leaving life he lost what can never be known by the multitudes who but half live; and peotry at least could assuredly have presented him but in scant measure with the consolations which the mere Epicurean can dispense with most easily, but which are needed most by those whose natures are most spiritual, and whose thirst after immortality is consequently the strongest. Let us not, however, intrude into what we know not. In many things we are allowed to rejoice with him. His life poetic, if not his external life, had been one long revel. “The open sky,” he writes to a friend, “sits upon our senses like a sapphire crown: the air is our robe of state; the earth is our throne; and the sea a mighty minstrel playing before it!” Less a human being than an Imagination embodied, he passed, “like a new-born spirit,” over a world that for him ever retained the dew of the morning; and bathing in all its freshest joys he partook but little of its stain.
Shelley and Keats remained with us only long enough to let us know how much we have lost—
We have beheld these lights but not possessed them. 8
NOTES
1 Cary's translation.
2 [1] P. 264, vol. i.
3 [2] P. 67, vol. i.
4 [3] P. 221, vol. i.
5 [1] P. 93, vol. i.
6 [1] P. 171.
7 [2] P. 224, Vol. i.
8 [1] “Mary Tudor.”
$$$
