
•■X. 



'^^JIn. 



^ 



4% 



\ 




^^ 



^**r^ 



'AT 



r 






^^ 






f 




1 






v;i 






\ 




^ ■ /* 



^c 




^^^ /7^^ o^^-^- 

^^M 



~> 



' ,^ 



O 




L I B R.AR.Y 

OF THE 

UNIVERSITY 

Of ILLINOIS 

v.\ 






9r^ 



THE 

WHITE HOODS; 

an l^i0totical ffitomance* 

BY 

ANNA ELIZA BRAY, 

LATE 

MRS. CHARLES STOTHARD, 

AUTHOR OF " DE FOIX ;" "LETTERS WRITTEN DURING A TOUR 

THROUGH NORMANDT AND BRITANNY ;" " MEMOIRS OF THE 

LATE CHARLES A. STOTHARD, F.S.A." &C. &C. 



Be brave then : for your captain is brave, 

And vows reformation. — 

There shall be no money : all shall eat 
And drink on my score ; and I will apparel them 
All in one livery, that they may agree like brothers, 
And worship me their lord." Shakspeare. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL I. 



LONDON; 

PRINTED FOR 

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN, 

PATERNOSTER-ROW, 

1828. 



London : 

Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode, 
New- Street- Square. 



f^3 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



r OR the Historical Parts of the following 
Narrative, the Writer (as in her work of 
De Foix) has derived her authority from 
Froissart. She has also endeavoured to 
give a slight, but faithful, Sketch of the 
Manners of the Country in which the 
scene of action is laid, as they existed 
at the period of her narrative. 



Vicarage, Tavistock, Devon, 
November 30th, 1826. 



Preparing for the Press. 

THE PROTESTANT ; a Tale of the Sixteenth 
Century. In Three Volumes. By the Author of 
The White Hoods. 



ERRATA. 

Vol. I. 
For « St. Omer" and " St. Omer's," read " St. Omers." 

Vol. II. 
Page 93. line 12. for " Country," read " County." 
Page 103. line 8. /or "impediments," read ''impedimenta. 
Page 179. line 16. for " Groto," read " Grote." 

Vol. III. 
Page 1. line 5. for " escape," read *' safety." 
Page 91. line 20. for " in restless," read « in the restless." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 



CHAPTER I. 



Whilst Lewis de Male was Earl of Flanders, 
and Charles the Fifth occupied the throne of 
France (that King being lord paramount, to 
whom the Earl owed homage for his dominions), 
the whole country of Flanders was in the highest 
state of wealth and prosperity; and, for com- 
merce, it might then be justly deemed the empo- 
rium of the world. For more than a century this 
had been gradually increasing, till at length it 
had arrived at that point when all rivalry ceased, 
and the Low Countries were looked upon as the 
mart of traffic, and the treasure house of riches. 
In consequence of the imperfect state of navi- 
gation at that period, a voyage from the north to 
the Mediterranean could not be accomplished in 

VOL. I. B 



2 THE WHITE HOODS. 

one summer. It was found expedient, there- 
fore, to fix upon some large towns to be used 
as vast storehouses, half way between the com- 
mercial cities of the north, and those of the 
south. Bruges and Ghent (but more especially 
the former) were selected for this purpose. And 
to a choice so fortunate for the prosperity of the 
country must be attributed the immense influx 
of wealth, which at this period was so widely 
and universally diffused throughout the Nether- 
lands, that poverty became almost unknown, 
even to the humblest members of the community. 
The commodities of the various trading cities of 
all Europe found their circulation through the 
hands of the merchants of Flanders ; and there 
was not at this period a commercial town of any 
import but had its separate company and ware- 
houses either at Ghent or Bruges. 

The merchants and chief citizens of the Low 
Countries lived in a state of splendour that 
emulated and often successfully rivalled the 
nobles and princes of France. Their cathedrals, 
churches, town-halls, and other public edifices, 
were of the most magnificent description. No 



THE WHITE HOODS. 3 

expence was spared in the external or internal 
decorations of these buildings. And the streets 
of Ghent and Bruges presented at every turn 
such a combination of fine Gothic structures, the 
dwellings of private inhabitants, that some of 
them now remaining may be considered as 
models of beauty and elegance in the domestic 
architecture of that era. 

The splendour of Bruges was indeed unri- 
valled. In that town alone there were not 
less than twenty palaces erected for the consuls 
or masters of the different trades ; and the 
citizens, with their wives and families, were in 
the habit of wearing such costly stuffs, gold, and 
jewels, that it was commonly said the value of 
a royal dower might sometimes be seen upon 
their backs. A well-known anecdote strikingly 
illustrates this fact ; for when Joanna of Navarre, 
the queen of Philip le Bel, visited Bruges, she 
was so surprised at the magnificent attire of the 
ladies of that city, that she exclaimed, " I 
thought that I had been the only queen in 
Bruges, but here I find all are such." 

Notwithstanding the vast trade of Flanders, 
B 2 



4 THE WHITE HOODS. 

it had in some measure been injured by the 
jealousies and quarrels of the two rival towns, 
Ghent and Bruges. These, unsatisfied in tlieir 
commercial transactions with a state of prosperity 
which no other cities in the world then possessed, 
were perpetually disagreeing with each other, 
in the hope to gain the pre-eminence. Such 
jealousies and civil strife (for the Flemings 
were often at variance with their lords) had in 
some measure injured their opulence during the 
lifetime of the father of Lewis de Male, the late 
Earl ; till their commerce and prosperity once 
more revived under the wise administration of 
Jacob Von Artaveld. But Jacob was now dead, 
and Lewis remained the undisturbed possessor 
of the dominions of the Low Countries. Once 
more their trade flourished, and their citizens 
revelled in the pride of luxury and of unbounded 
wealth. 

The beautiful city of Ghent, which, like 
Venice, might almost be termed a city of the 
waters, stood upon twenty-six small islands, on 
the conflux of the rivers Lis, Scheldt, Moeze, 
and Lieve, divided and intersected by a number 



THE WHITE HOODS. 5 

of minor streams formed by canals. The streets 
were of commodious construction, ornamented 
by various public edifices, besides churches. 
The castle (where the good Queen Phillippa of 
England had brought into the world her son 
John, who took his surname from his birth- 
place,) was a vast and massive building of the 
thirteenth century. It stood within the walls 
of the town, guarded by many a strong gate and 
heavy tower. The houses in Ghent were lofty, 
and exhibited that style of structure so peculiar 
to the Gothic ages, wherein taste and stability 
became united. Their material often consisted 
of small bricks of a fine texture, and of a grey 
colour, which were so well put together, and so 
well combined with the various ornaments of 
the edifices, that they could scarcely be con- 
sidered inferior to stone. 

The cathedral of St. Bavon, then newly 
finished, exhibited all the magnificence that 
wealth and talent could supply as an offering 
to the superstitions of the Romish church; 
whilst the towers and grey walls of St. Nicholas 
looked even then venerable from their antiquity. 
b3 



b THE WHITE HOODS. 

The communication from one street to another 
was facilitated by a number of swing bridges, 
boats, and small craft. The town was entirely 
walled throughout the whole of its vast circum- 
ference. And so strong were these defences, 
that even at the present time the remains of 
these walls and towers seem impregnable to the 
beholder. 

All was busy — all in motion. Every thing 
bespoke the thriving activity of commercial 
wealth. Here were seen vessels unloading the 
wool transported from England, or the timber 
from Norway. There a Spanish galleon, so 
heavily laden that her gunwale was almost 
under water, brought the rich wines of Anda- 
lusia, and ingots of gold and silver, to the 
universal mart. The gay pendants of the light 
Italian felucca streamed in the air, as the pilot 
stood at tl.e helm, and thought, as he passed 
down the many canals of Ghent, how great 
was their inferiority to the channels of his own 
city, that rose from the bosom of the Adriatic ; 
whilst, as the doge proceeded to claim the latter 
as his bride, her white and marble domes looked 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 7 

as if they were formed for the palaces of Nep- 
tune, and the sea nymphs of his train. Whilst 
the Venetian thus carolled his lively song, the 
Frenchman talked, laughed, and danced upon 
the deck of his vessel^ as if his spirits, light, 
sparkling, and brisk as the wines of his native 
country, must necessarily find a vent, or would 
burst by an excited fermentation. Here the 
heavy Dutchman calculated the value of his 
butter and cheese, and the difference of the 
exchange, whether it were now in favour of the 
Holland gelder or of the Flemish " old crown." 
The Dane looked surly, and drank brandy, as 
he unloaded his stores of dried stock-fish, hides^ 
and furs ; and the Englishman cursed the 
Flemings for cowardly rascals, who could never 
find spirit enough to quarrel with any country 
but their own. 

In one of the streets of Ghent, near the market 
place, stood a house of more than ordinary beauty 
in its structure. It was ascended by a flight of 
steps that terminated beneath a vaulted porch, 
having two lateral apertures or arches, richly 
decorated with Gothic carvings in stone. Above 
B 4 



8 THE WHITE HOODS. 

the oaken door it sheltered stood within a niche 
the image of the Virgin Mary, formed of wood, 
painted and gilt, and holding the model of a ship 
in her hands. Underneath was this inscription, 
emblazoned in golden letters, in the Flemish 
tongue : — 

" Sir Simon de Bete, knight, master of the 
very worshipful the company of goldsmiths, and 
burgomaster of Ghent, caused me to be made, 
in honour of our blessed Lady the Virgin Mary, 
in memory of her great delivery of his good ship 
the Cockatrice, when laden with ingots of gold, 
and in peril of the waters : for which service, I 
am but one of those three hundred images vowed 
by the worshipful Sir Simon to our Lady of de- 
liverance, whereof that in gold stands in the 
church of the Holy Virgin of this town." 

The house of this " worshipful Sir Simon" 
stood facing one of those clear streams or canals 
that watered the city ; opposite were objects, 
which, though not the most picturesque a painter 
could desire, afforded the fairest prospect the 
eyes of a goldsmith would desire to look upon — 
the offices, the warehouse, and the workshops of 



THE WHITE HOODS. 9 

his craft. Sir Simon, it is probable, would not 
have exchanged these objects for the finest in 
nature ; and it might perhaps have been the 
sight of the high tower of the church dedicated 
to the Virgin, which was seen peering above 
their slanting roofs in the back ground, that first 
inspired him with the idea of that pious vow re- 
corded upon his door ; a vow made when he felt 
some alarm for the safety of his Cockatrice, whose 
stores he longed to see deposited within the 
halcyon precincts of his own warehouse, far from 
the peril of those waters, which, like prodigals 
and spendthrifts as they are, make no more 
account of the golden lading of a vessel, than they 
do of the ballast in her hold. 

It was upon the close of an autumnal day, 
when the artisans of the various trades of Ghent 
had already retired to their homes, and all was 
gradually subsiding into silence and repose, that 
the great town-bell rang the signal, which bade 
all who were desirous of passing the night in the 
city to hasten within its walls before the gates 
were closed. The evening was mild and beauti- 
ful ; the canals, no longer disturbed by the busy 



10 THE WHITE HOODS. 

passage of vessels of burthen, (which, during the 
day, had either unloaded their stores on the 
quays and wharfs, or were passing out to com- 
mence their navigation down the Scheldt,) looked 
at this hour calm, smooth, and clear, and reflected 
upon their surface^ like a thousand mirrors, many 
a Gothic building, together with the fretted orna- 
ments and lofty spires of the surrounding churches 
and monasteries. 

It was now that a little boat^ containing but 
one person besides the boatman, was seen to 
glide gently down one of these canals, and made 
towards the steps that formed a landing place 
opposite to the habitation of Sir Simon de Bete. 
The passenger^ on quitting the boat, dismissed 
it^ and with a slow pace ascended the steps, and 
for some time walked up and down the street. 
He seemed to be about fifty years old, his aspect 
was peculiar^ and his features bore the traces of 
thought and care. His dress indicated the man 
of substance rather than superfluity : it was good, 
respectable, but not ostentatious. He was habited 
in a suit of black velvet. The mantle, tight 
around the throat, with two immense sleeves, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 11 

through which the arms found their way at the 
elbow (the rest of the sleeve falling almost to the 
ground), was lined with scarlet brocade, and 
trimmed with fur. The jerkin, or underdress, 
was simply of black velvet ; and the pouch or 
almonier, which hung on the right side^ and 
served the purpose of a pocket as well as of a 
purse, was suspended by a plain leathern belt, 
fastened by a buckle of gold. Upon his head he 
wore a hood of black velvet, and about his neck, 
suspended by a purple ribband, appeared a small 
cross, also of gold. 

His countenance was pallid, and his brows, 
which projected considerably beyond a pair of keen 
grey eyes, were knit into somewhat of an habitual 
frown. The mouth was large and conspicuous, 
as the beard was only suffered to grow, like a 
fringe^ around the lower part of the chin and 
face. He at length ascended the steps before the 
house of Sir Simon de Bete. He knocked upon 
the door with his ebony walking staff; and a boy 
opened to him the portal, who, from his dress of 
many colours, his light hair and complexion, 
with a certain heavy look and inaptitude to any 



12 THE WHITE HOODS. 

motion of activity^ was doubtless a Flemish varlet 
of the true breed. 

The person who knocked at the door, having 
addressed the enquiry if Sir Simon might yet be 
returned home, was answered in the affirmative 
with a " Yaw, mynheer" of the most sluggish in- 
difference. ^^ Then tell him," said the enquirer, 
" that Master John Lyon waits without, and 
would speak with him." The varlet drawled out 
another " Yaw, mynheer," and went to do his 
errand as slowly as if his feet which carried him 
were clogged ; and, whilst he is gone to inform 
his master of the arrival of John Lyon, whom he 
left in the hall to await his return, (for there was 
too much consequence about the worshipful Sir 
Simon, who was one of the chief burgomasters 
of the city, to admit an unceremonious introduc- 
tion of any person into his presence,) we shall 
take the opportunity of making our reader 
acquainted with the master of the goldsmiths 
company of Ghent. 

Sir Simon de Bete was a little, fat, heavy man, 
whose whole person did not present one angle or 
straight line. Indeed there was such a profusion 



THE WHITE HOODS. 13 

of rotundity^ that we can find within the compass 
of our brain no other apt comparison for him, 
than to say that he resembled one of those tubs 
or firkins in which the merchants of Amster- 
dam are wont to transport their butter. His 
face was broad and ruddy, with two little bright 
eyes that twinkled fi'om out the surrounding fur- 
rows of fat like the small lighted wicks of two 
such huge candles as may be seen to decorate the 
altars of the catholic saints. 

There was altogether a monied air about the 
little goldsmith, both in his person and manners. 
He walked like a man well to do in the world, 
with a certain strut, as if his legs carried a bur- 
then of some consequence. His shoes creeked, 
and his mantle rustled. He was wont seldom to 
doff his cap to any one, and he talked loud, and 
generally gave opinions in an affirmative manner, 
like oracles from which there is no appeal. He 
would enter the exchange of merchants at Ghent 
as the man upon whose smile or frown the fate of 
its fluctuation must depend, and his refusal to 
credit a rising trader was a certain signal that he 



14 THE WHITE HOODS. 

was not, in our commercial phrase^ a good man, 
or a man of substance. 

As a burgomaster no one was more important. 
Not Solon or Lycurgus could have ever laid down 
the laws they instituted with greater force or per- 
sistance than did Sir Simon de Bete, when seated 
in the high-backed oaken chair of the town-hall 
of Ghent, (with his little legs dangling down 
because they could not reach the footstool,) sup- 
ported on the right hand by a jurat bearing a 
silver mace, and on the left by the sheriff of the 
bourg with the keys of the city. 

Sir Simon was a great stickler for the fran- 
chises of his native town ; and any proposal in 
the shape of innovation, alteration, or accommo- 
dation^ was sure to meet his decided opposition, 
unless it had been submitted to his approval in 
private, before it was presumed to be broached in 
public debate. 

Yet there was no want of good-nature about 
the little goldsmith ; for^ in truth, he liked to 
seem the great man rather than actually to be 
such. His dignity was generally put on or laid 



THE WHITE HOODS. 15 

aside with his official gown and staff; and he fre- 
quently made himself uncomfortable by the 
endeavour to keep up the grandeur of his assumed 
character, when he would rather have left public 
pomp for the comfort of a snug fireside, and the 
unaffected convivial sociability of a friendly gossip 
over a flagon of wine. In fact, Sir Simon might be 
compared to a man who accustoms himself to 
walk the streets on tip-toe, merely for the sake 
of looking taller, but who longs again to tread 
upon sole and heel, where he may seem less, but 
can move with ease, within the privacy of his own 
chamber. 

Yet great as he was, he was not paramount; 
for there were those (one person at least in the 
world) who had the power to overawe the burgo- 
master, as much as others were overawed by him. 
Sir Simon de Bete was this evening dressed in a 
rich suit of crimson velvet, lined with minevar. 
His circular cap was ornamented in front with a 
clasp of jewels. This cap, when not upon the 
head, hung pendant over the shoulder by a long 
band that fell down in front, and was ornamented 
with a border, the band being called the tippet, 



lb THE WHITE HOODS. 

and the cap the chaperon. The broach or fer- 
mail which fastened his mantle was also of jewels; 
and a chain, heavy with massive gold, and of 
the finest Antwerp workmanship, hung round 
his neck. His pouch and long dagger were sus- 
pended by a girdle of gold and jewels. And 
although the long dagger was sometimes incon- 
venient from getting between his little short legs, 
so as nearly to upset the equilibrium of their 
motion, yet being a knight, Sir Simon never 
forgot that part of his attire, to proclaim he was 
such. 

The apartment in which the burgomaster was 
seated was low roofed, but extensive in its dimen- 
sions; the floor was of oak, and so highly polished 
that it might have served the purpose of a mirror. 
A piece of Persian carpetting was spread in the 
centre of the room; for the commodities and 
rarities of eastern nations had, even at this period, 
found their way to the opulent traders of the 
Low Countries. A woollen cloth of the brightest 
colours, curiously interwoven, and manufactured 
at Bruges, covered a table, and hung as low as 
the ground. The chairs and benches were of 



THE WHITE HOODS. 17 

carved ebony, some inlaid with ivory, with 
cushions of velvet fringed with gold. A buffet 
having but one shelf stood opposite the windows 
at the lower end of the room, and was filled with 
plate of chased gold and silver of the finest work- 
manship. 

The chimney, which was large enough to 
admit several persons within its ample sides, was 
entirely lined with small tiles of earthenware, 
each bearing some pictorial device, principally 
from Scripture. The dogs that decorated the 
hearth were of silver, with the arms of Ghent 
on a shield, as the finishing ornament, at their 
top. The apartment was hung with tapestry 
from the famous looms of Bruges. It repre- 
sented several subjects from Holy Writ; and 
amongst them appeared that of the return of 
the prodigal son, who, dressed like a Dutch 
skipper, very ragged, yet very plump, was seen 
coming to his rejoicing father, followed by a 
couple of pigs. The father, habited as a burgo- 
master, appeared directing the roasting of the 
fatted calf to entertain him within the kitchen of 
a Flemish inn ; having all the accompaniments of 
flagons, long glasses, tubs, brass pans, and pewter 

VOL. I. c 



18 THE WHITE HOODS. 

platters ; and the rejoicing of Heaven over the 
penitent sinner was emblematically expressed by 
two pottle-bellied angels in the Flemish costume, 
who played upon the rebec and fiddle. 

The fireplace (a luxury which the wealth of 
Sir Simon had enabled him to introduce, in pre- 
ference to the common stove of his country,) was 
decorated above by an oaken shelf, upon which 
were placed some of those figures, carved in 
wood, that were then, as they are now, manu- 
factured in Germany, but commonly known in 
England by the name of Dutch toys. Those 
which ornamented the shelf of the goldsmith 
were of a pious as well as commercial order. 
Saints, martyrs^ merchants, with the instruments 
of their sufferings, or the emblems of their 
traffic, in their hands, all stood indiscriminately 
ranged together; whilst here and there was 
intermixed some Indian or Chinese toy, such 
as a pagoda curiously carved in ivory, or the 
model of a Hindoo god. A Venetian mirror, 
moreover, which hung opposite, added, by its 
reflection, to the confusion of this heterogeneous 
assemblage of persons and things. 

The most beautiful as well as the most pre- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 19 

cious ornament of the room was a fine picture, 
the subject from Holy Writ, executed by that 
great but now little-known artist John Hemling, 
who not many years after this period actually 
ended his days from poverty within the hospital 
of St. John at Bruges. The arts, even at this 
time, had begun to flourish in Flanders ; and 
for beauty of colouring, richness, exquisite 
finish, a faithful delineation of nature just as she 
appeared before him, (but without any imparted 
grace from the painter himself,) the works of 
John Hemling have never been exceeded by 
any artist, even of the days of Leo X. And 
to prove the truth of this assertion, we could 
wish all our readers, who may chance to travel 
into Flanders, to visit the hospital of St. John 
at Bruges, where they will behold that astonish- 
ing production of his pencil, the marriage 
of St. Catharine, with the decollation of 
St. John.* 

To return to our subject. Sir Simon was 
seated at the table in the apartment just de- 

♦ For some account of the works of John Hemling, at Bruges, 
see Memoirs of the Life of the late C. A. Stothard, F. S. A. 
C 2 



20 THE WHITE HOODS. 

scribed, partaking of some refreshment after his 
return home ; and whilst he took a sUce from the 
capon that was before him, and filled out a cup 
of wine, he seemed to be glancing his eye upon 
the rich-chased workmanship of the silver dish 
in which it was served up, with all the critical 
acumen of a goldsmith. Scarcely had he finished 
his first cup of wine, when the boy opened the 
door, and announced the arrival of Master John 
Lyon. «* What," exclaimed Sir Simon, " my 
very good friend Master John Lyon, the deacon 
of the pilots ! why do you make him wait ? why 
did you not bring him hither at once ?" Sir Simon 
probably forgot, in the good-natured feeling 
which the announcement of his friend's arrival 
had excited, his own express order, that all per- 
sons, before appearing in his presence, should be 
duly announced. 

The boy, who knew perfectly well both his 
own duty and the dignity of his master, made no 
reply, but hastened to conduct into the chamber 
the deacon of the pilots. Sir Simon kept his 
seat, till Master John Lyon had seated himself 
in one of the heavy ebony chairs, which the boy 



THE WHITE HOODS. 21 

with some difficulty managed to bring from the 
side of the room^ and placed opposite his master. 
He then retired ; and as soon as the door was 
closed, no third person being any longer pre- 
sent to witness the condescension, Sir Simon 
rose up, and stepping forward, his little round 
legs brought him speedily to John Lyon, whom 
he saluted with a hearty shake of the hand. 
" How do you do, deacon ?" said Sir Simon ; 
" very glad to see you — have not seen you 
since I left Ghent — am just come home — 
much news stirring ? how do you — very glad 
to see you — take a cup of wine — and how does 
pretty Mistress Anna, your sweet daughter?" 
Sir Simon here stopt short in his speech, as if he 
all at once remembered he was indulging him- 
self in a too great familiarity of manner ; not as 
towards his friend, but too free considering what 
the habit of his manners ought to be. He there- 
fore added, in somewhat a more grave air; 
" We have some things of importance. Master 
John Lyon, which we, who are the burgomasters 
of this good town of Ghent, must discuss in the 
town-hall, where time, place, and circumstances 
c3 



22 THE WHITE HOODS. 

may more befit the consequence of our own 
persons, and the honour of the magistracy of the 
bourg." 

John Lyon made no reply to this speech, 
which was mtended as a dignified opening to 
some communication Sir Simon was desirous to 
make relative to the business of the city. But 
John did not ask what it was, and only answered 
with that slight notice of the matter people use^ 
who feel they must make some reply to a subject 
to which they are perfectly indifferent. 

Sir Simon was a little mortified, and thrust 
his hand into his pouch, and there played with 
some of the old crowns with which it was well 
stored ; an action he was apt to use in moments 
of peculiar dignity. He was preparing a yet 
more pompous speech, when his keen eyes, which 
twinkled with self consequence^ happened to 
glance upon the deacon, and he was so struck 
with the melancholy cast of John's features, that 
he quite forgot the importance of knight, master 
of the goldsmiths' company, and burgomaster, 
in a kind-hearted feeling for his friend. " Why," 
he immediately exclaimed^ " Why John Lyon, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 23 

man, what is this? you look as dull and as com- 
fortless as if some evil had befallen you. I hope 
pretty Mistress Anna is well, and not in her low 
spirits again." 

" She is well," answered John. 

" Why then what ails thee man ?" said Sir 
Simon ; ^' why you look as if the Scheld was 
blocked up, and all the pilots turned adrift to 
steer without a rudder." 

" And so they are or will be for me," replied 
the deacon, " and your words are but too true ; 
for us, at least, the Scheld is blocked up. I 
am," continued John with energy, as he arose from 
his chair and paced the room, " I am a ruined 
man." 

" A ruined man, John !" exclaimed Sir Simon, 
" You a ruined man ! why this is inconceivable, 
you surely cannot mean to say so." 

" It is but too true," answered John, " and it 
was to tell you of it, that I sought you." 

" I had rather you had not told me then, dea- 
con," said the good-natured burgomaster, with an 
expression of unfeigned concern ; '^ for to hear of 
the ruin of my friends is the last piece of intelli- 
c4 



24 THE WHITE HOODS. 

gence that could give me pleasure. But since I 
know the worst, tell me all the matter of it. I 
hope things are not so bad as to be beyond all 
remedy. You a ruined man ! and yet you deacon 
of the pilots of Ghent, and chief favourite of the 
Earl of Flanders, his bosom counsellor and 
friend !" 

" I was all you say," answered John ; " but I 
am neither now." 

'^ How !" again exclaimed Sir Simon in the 
utmost astonishment, "^ not deacon of the pilots ! 
not the Earl's favourite ! why what in the name of 
all the saints does this mean ? I am more and 
more bewildered. Say, what has happened in 
Ghent since I have been absent in Amsterdam ? 
I am but this day returned home ; I knew nothing 
of all this. But it is ever so ; no sooner do / 
leave the city, than some change, some trouble, 
some calamity, is sure to arise. Things never go 
well when I am away ; in fact, a town without 
the head or chief ruler is like a chain with a link 
broken, it soon becomes good for nothing, it will 
fall to the. ground, it will be lost, or disordered^ 
though of the purest gold." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 25 

: ^' It is true, most worthy burgher^" replied 
John Lyon; " but yet I do not see how your 
being here could have prevented what has befallen 
me. I am ruined by the machinations of that 
accursed Gilbert Matthew." 

'' I know him^ I know the rascal," said Sir 
Simon ; " a sly double-dealing rogue, who out- 
witted me in the affair of the ingots and ducats. 
They might have been had by the per-centage of 
ten crowns the less from the commander of the 
San Jago^ but for his cunning. Yet how can 
Gilbert Matthew, with all his brotherhood to back 
him, have injured you ?" 

" I will tell you," answered John Lyon ; " for 
hither I came not only to tell you of my grievance, 
but to consult with you on matters that concern 
us all. Our franchises are invaded, shaken, and 
endangered." 

" What !" exclaimed the little burgomaster, 
as he started from his seat, " do you say this to 
me, and whilst I hold my office in the good city 
of Ghent ? No, not a franchise shall be touched ; 
or woe be to the innovator. I will shew to 



26 THE WHITE HOODS. 

all Ghent, and to all the world, who and what 
I am." 

Su* Simon raised his head, as he shook his 
uplifted hand, at these words, and seemed some 
inches taller, at least in his own conceit. The 
liberties of Ghent, dear as they really were to 
this zealous citizen, did not at this moment, 
perhaps, so much engross his thoughts, as the sense 
of his own importance ; and, although he had but 
an instant before felt the utmost anxiety to learn 
what were the misfortunes which had befallen 
his friend, he was now most desirous to hear 
what those innovations were likely to be, which 
might call his own personal influence into action 
to repel them. John Lyon, who knew perfectly 
well the character of the goldsmith, saw he had 
lighted the spark that was likely to burst into a 
flame ; and, being resolved to obtain a hearing, 
he somewhat unceremoniously stopt his friend in 
the midst of an harangue on the value of general, 
personal, and individual liberty ; and begged 
him to resume his seat, as he could not long re- 
main with him. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 27 

Sir Simon complied, and John Lyon once 
more continued. ^' I must be brief," he said; 
«^ but first are the doors made fast? we must 
have no listeners." 

'' Listeners in my house !" exclaimed Sir 
Simon ; " No, the rogues dare not come so much 
as without the threshold of this chamber uncalled 
for whilst / am in it. You may speak without 
fear Master Deacon ; that is, deacon that hath 
been ; for I think you said you were no longer 
such ; so ran the theme of your discourse." 

^« It did so," replied John Lyon^ ''■ and I 
must open the matter by telling you how I came 
to be dispossessed of my office. There has, you 
know, long subsisted an ancient enmity between 
my family and that of the Matthews. But I 
have endeavoured to live in peace with them ; 
till Gilbert, some two years since, asked my 
daughter Anna for his wife, as the means of 
ending our family discords. This I positively 
refused, to the great comfort of my damsel, who 
could never endure him. But this refusal re- 
newed the old quarrel between us ; so that from 



28 THE WHITE HOODS. 

that hour to the present, he has sought in every 
way to molest me, and to injure me in the favour 
of the Earl. Now the devil^ who never rests, 
but walks abroad to do what mischief he can 
devise^ at length put it into the head of Gilbert 
Matthew to propose to the Earl of Flanders an 
increase to his revenue, making me the instru- 
ment, as deacon of the pilots, by levying a tax 
on the navigation of the rivers Scheld and Lis. 
I knew how hard this would fall upon our 
mariners, and discouraged the idea. What then 
does Gilbert Matthew, but persuade our lord to 
insist at least upon my making the experiment ? 
There was a time when the Earl would never 
have imposed such a task on me ; but there had 
lately been some private circumstances between 
my lord and me, that had somewhat lessened my 
influence with him." 

" Indeed," said Sir Simon, " and what were 
they ? Yet I think, John Lyon, I can give a 
shrewd guess at them. I will not, however, say 
more just now, but attend to your statement of 
this business. Had I been in Ghent^ Gilbert 



THE WHITE HOODS. 29 

Matthew would never have dared to propose 
such a levy, without the sanction of the chief 
burgomaster of the city." 

^^ You forget/' said John Lyon^ " that I told 
you he was supported in his measures by the 
Earl ; and that himself and his seven brethren 
being all wealthy pilots of the navigation, their 
influence could overrule the humble and poorer 
class of the mariners. I was obliged at last to 
propose the tax at the meeting of our pilots ; 
when Gilbert Matthew, by his secret machina- 
tions and intrigues, caused those brothers^ and 
the other pilots, with one voice to refuse a com- 
pliance with the very measure he had himself 
first suggested to the Earl." 

'' Just like him ! Gilbert Matthew to the 
letter!" exclaimed Sir Simon; '^ always. double 
dealing, turning and twisting, and putting on a 
false shew ; like the Antwerp Jews, who give to 
base metals the colour of gold." 

'' After this meeting, I informed the Earl of 
the refusal of the pilots to submit to an impost 
either on their own body, or to consent to its 
being levied on the foreign traders ; as it must 



30 THE WHITE HOODS. 

eventually injure the navigation of the Scheld. 
The Earl was displeased; and some other cir- 
cumstances soon after occurring to offend him 
in our private intercourse, I was displaced from 
my office ; and Gilbert Matthew nominated as 
deacon of the pilots." 

" The artful, intriguing scoundrel !" said Sir 
Simon ; " but when was this ? and what induced 
the Earl to make him deacon ?" 

" I have since learnt," replied John Lyon, 
" that Gilbert persuaded the Earl I had failed 
in fixing the tax upon the pilots from a wilful 
mismanagement of the cause ; and so well had 
he instructed his brothers how to act, that no 
sooner was he made deacon, than what with 
bribing some, cajoling others, and threatening 
more, he brought them all round; the tax is 
fixed upon the pilots ; and thus begins the first 
innovation of the ancient franchises of Ghent. 
A levy is now talked of to be laid on all metals, 
from the finest gold to the basest lead." 

" What !" exclaimed Sir Simon, " an impost 
on gold ! it shall never be ; no, never, whilst 
I, Sir Simon de Bete, knight, master of the 



THE WHITE HOODS. 31 

company of worshipful goldsmiths, and one 
of the burgomasters of Ghent ; whilst I have 
a voice to raise against it, a ci'own to spend, 
or a weapon to draw, Ghent shall hold 
her franchises. The liberty of the citizen, 
represented in my person, shall find her deter- 
mined assertor. And all the world shall see 
that whilst Sir Simon de Bete sat in the council 
chamber of this town, neither earl, nor Gilbert 
Matthew, nor lord, nor all the powers combined, 
could make him yield one scruple of that liberty 
he values more than life, and will maintain 
with it." 

Whilst Sir Simon made this eloquent speech 
in a raised tone of voice, a noise was suddenly 
heard in the passage leading to the chamber. 
John Lyon did not particularly notice it, but Sir 
Simon, who seemed to have a perfect compre- 
hension of what the noise implied, suddenly 
lowered his voice, and although he finished his 
speech, the word liberty was pronounced in 
somewhat a faltering tone. Steps now advanced 
towards the door ; Sir Simon quietly dropt into 
his chair ; but who it was that came, or of what 



32 THE WHITE HOODS. 

kind was that noise^ which thus acted like a 
sudden shock of electricity, to surprise and dis- 
compose the nerves of the Flemish champion of 
liberty, must be told in the next chapter. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 33 



CHAP. II. 

It is surprising, by a habit of attention to 
minute sounds, to what a degree of nicety tlie 
organ which conveys them to the mind can dis- 
cover the difference between the smallest, or 
least apparently various movements, knocks, 
whispers, words, steps, and, in short, sounds of 
all kinds and descriptions. Thus the servants 
of people of fashion, in our days, can pronounce 
by the very knock upon the door, to whom their 
masters or mistresses will or will not be at home ; 
the thundering rap of nobility being easily dis- 
tinguished from the less imposing rat-a-tat of 
middling life. And the masters and mistresses 
themselves are often perfect judges between the 
small slight knock of a soliciting tradesman, 
and the confident, clamorous ring of an impor- 
tunate dun. 

In the same manner may the sounds that pro- 
ceed from the lips or the feet be distinguished. 

VOL. I. D 



34 THE WHITE HOODS. 

The no which means yes may be confidently 
transposed in the mind of the hearer, if the first 
monosyllable be pronounced with a slight and 
hesitating accentuation ; a sort of no that hangs 
upon the lips as if unwilling to depart from 
them ; and the determined straight-forward 
tread of an angry person, which scarcely turns 
aside from any impediment that may arise in the 
way, can be distinguished from the sober pace 
of the unimpassioned, or the light brisk step of 
the gay and good-humoured. 

Sir Simon, by long habit, had become an 
adept in discriminating between sounds ; and the 
slightest word or movement which proceeded 
from the Lady Judith was as perfectly compre- 
hended by him^ even through the barriers of 
closed doors or windows, as if no such obstacles 
had existed. He knew her mood by her step ; 
he could tell the degree of her anger by the least 
word ; and the blood-heat of her wrath, or the 
freezing point of her severity, were as well 
known to Sir Simon, by a certain acquaintance 
with small but sure indications, as if he had pos- 
sessed an actual thermometer of her temper ; 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 35 

which was more liable to change and variation, 
than even the climate of our own charming little 
island in the west. 

It so happened that Lady Judith was one of those 
persons who^ feeling a sense of their own uncom- 
mon value, modestly think that all this round 
world was assuredly made for no other than them- 
selves, and that all things in it should submit to 
their pleasure. Yet as there are bounds set to 
every thing terrestrial, even to the flight of the 
winds, and the raging of the ocean, that they shall 
go so far and no farther, so likewise there are, for- 
tunately, bounds fixed, beyond which the raging 
of human passions cannot extend. Thus there 
never was yet known a tyrant who could carry 
his tyranny over all the earth ; and a she-tyrant 
of private life, whatever may be her desires, call 
seldom find opportunity to extend her despotism 
beyond the precincts of her own house. But as 
waters when dammed up are oft-times but the 
more terrible when they burst their confines, 
even so Lady Judith, from having but a small 
sphere of action, poured out the sluices of her 
wrath with but the greater violence on the unfor- 
D 2 



36 THE WHITE HOODS. 

tunate hen-pecked little goldsmith, whenever 
she was resolved to discharge her burthen of 
conceit, consequence, or ill-humour. And, like 
all persons who unite with a despotic temper a 
high opinion of their own powers and abilities, 
she could not endure that any thing should go 
forward in her house without herself being at 
the bead of it. Whatever was done, and how- 
ever well done, unless this had been the case, 
was sure to meet with her decided displeasure. 

Lady Judith was about as tall in stature for a 
woman, as Sir Simon was little for a man. Her 
hair and eyes were of the deepest shade of black, 
which we have generally observed to be a sure 
indication of a violent temper. Her lips were 
thin and pale ; whilst a more than ordinary pro- 
fusion of red was spread about her cheeks, and 
encroached even upon the promontory of her 
nose, which turned up as if in scorn of the less 
glowing and more delicate hue of her mouth. A 
good set of white teeth adorned the latter, and 
as Lady Judith was by no means insensible to the 
value of this pleasing addition to the attractions 
of the human countenance, she was rather fond 



THE WHITE HOODS. 37 

of displaying it, and had therefore contracted a 
habit of opening wide her mouthy grinning, and 
hanging down her lower lip, which, when angry, 
produced such a distorted expression, that she 
might sometimes be compared to a snarling dog, 
that shews its teeth before it bites. 

We have noticed, in the conclusion of our 
last chapter, that some slight sound or noise 
occurred, which, although it passed unnoticed by 
John Lyon, was perfectly understood by Sir 
Simon, who, upon hearing it, dropt quietly into 
his chair. Scarcely had he done so, when the 
door of the apartment was thrown open to its 
utmost extent, and the Lady Judith walked in to 
give her husband a welcome home. The nature 
of this welcome was already anticipated by the 
little champion of the liberties of Ghent, who, 
although a great man without doors, yet in his 
own house scarcely dared to say that his soul 
was his own, at least in the presence of his 
wife. 

When Lady Judith entered the room, she 
threw a quick glance all around. Her husband 
and his friend were both seated, (for the latter 
D 3 



$8 THE WHITE HOODS. 

had scarcely had the time to rise up, and the for- 
mer was too much surprised and confounded to 
think of it,) this the lady remarked, as well as 
the capon and the flagons upon the table, and 
the sight of the good cheer conveyed to her 
active imagination the idea, that Sir Simon and 
his companion had committed the offence of 
enjoying themselves during her absence. There 
are tempers so soured by their own perverseness, 
that they cannot endure to witness in another 
that social tranquillity to which they are them- 
selves strangers. Of this temper was the burgo- 
master's wife. It seemed, therefore, that the 
suspicion, that her husband, who had never been 
allowed one comfortable hour in her presence, 
should dare to find it when she was absent, 
added fuel to fire ; and the first exclamation, of 
'^ So, Sir Simon, you are at your cups, I see," 
which passed the lips of his spouse, pointed out 
to the worthy observer of sounds, words, and 
signs, that her wrath was already at a very high 
point, with every probability of rising to a 
degree still higher. 

" And so. Sir Simon," continued the Lady 



THE WHITE HOODS. 39 

Judith, whilst she just noticed John Lyon by a 
slight inclination of the head^ " you have made 
a pretty business of it, indeed, to go jaunting 
after your own foolish speculations at Amster- 
dam, and leave me to extricate you from such a 
difficulty as your own negligence has brought 
upon you." 

«^ What difficulty, my lady," said Sir Simon, 
"I — I — I do not know of any," he added, in a 
stammering voice, as if afraid to profess he was 
even ignorant of having done wrong. John Lyon, 
in the meantime, had risen to offer his chair to 
the mistress of the house. 

*^ You may keep your seat. Master John 
Lyon," said the incensed lady ; " but do you. 
Sir Simon, get up, that is my place ; get up, 
and give me the foot cushion, for I am weary." 

There is no situation, perhaps, more disagree- 
able for a third person, than to be present during 
a squabble between man and wife, especially if 
he should be appealed to by either to give an 
opinion, which would oblige him to depart from 
his neutral ground of non-interference, and thus 
necessarily offend one or both of the parties by 
D 4 



40 THE WHITE HOODS. 

SO doing. John Lyon knew this, and arose to 
depart; but being earnestly solicited to stay 
where he was^ especially by Sir Simon^ who felt 
his courage to face the wrath of his wife would 
even yet more desert him if left alone with her, 
John remained, and resolving to observe a strict 
silence during whatever scene might ensue, he 
placed himself as near as he could to the window, 
that his attention might seem to be engrossed by 
objects without doors. 

" And so/* continued Lady Judith, (when 
she had seated herself in the chair which her 
husband had vacated, to sneak away and place 
himself upon a bench somewhat in the back- 
ground, as if desirous of getting off as far as 
possible from his ungentle spouse), " and so you 
have made a rare business of it, with your stu- 
pidity and your neglects, and here have I been 
going to and fro, for the last three days, upon an 
errand that would disgrace the lowest frow in 
Ghent, and wholly unbecoming the dignity of 
the wife of one of its chief magistrates." 

The lady, who never thought upon the dignity 
of her husband's station, excepting when any 



THE WHITE HOODS. 41 

addition to her own could be derived from the 
mention of it, pronounced the last sentence in a 
very high tone ; and the words dignity and 
magistrate meeting the ear of Sir Simon, and 
acting upon him with mechanical impulse, he 
started up^ and ventured to waddle nearer, and 
to take another seat by the table ; " I hope," 
said he, " that my wife would never stoop to any 
thing unworthy of either her or myself^ nor can 
I see how I could be the occasion." 

" But I can see and know it too/* answered 
his wife, " for what but your own stupidity 
could have allowed the finest chain of gold that 
was ever yet worked at Antwerp, expressly for 
the Earl of Flanders, and ordered by him of you^ 
to be sold to that bold impudent Italian Bianca, 
the mistress of your swaggering young burgher 
Philip Von Artaveld." 

" I," said Sir Simon, «' I sell the gold chain 
bespoke by the most noble the Earl of Flanders^ 
to the beautiful Italian stranger^ I never did any 
such thing ; I — " 

'^ Hold your peace," exclaimed Lady Judith 
peremptorily, " hold your peace, it were better 



48 THE WHITE HOODS. 

you did so than to be prating about Italian wan- 
tons. What do you know about beautiful, 
indeed ? You might keep your eyes, if you can- 
not your feet, at home, I think," continued the 
shrew, as she looked up, and gave a glance 
towards the Venetian mirror that stood on the 
opposite side, and reflected the tall lank person 
and the fine dress of the Lady Judith. 

" I am sure, my dear," replied Sir Simon, 
" I only said so of Bianca, because all the town 
talks about her beauty. No man respects virtue 
in your sex more than I do ; and as for beauty, 
I am sure I never thought about such vanities 
when I chose you, Lady Judith, but only your 
good name." 

" You are a fool," hastily exclaimed his wife, 
who was by no means pleased at this compliment 
made to her virtue at the expence of her beauty; 
" once more hold your tongue and let me go on, 
and as for Bianca, she has more of fine clothes 
and Italian airs to set her off than real beauty 
— a Uttle thing as she is, scarcely up to my 
shoulder." 

'^ And yet," said Sir Simon, '' if all be true 



THE WHITE HOODS. 43 

that I have heard, the situation of Bianca^ how- 
ever she may now be sunk in guilt, was originally 
deserving pity." 

" We do not want to talk about her," replied 
the wife, " for she and you, Sir Simon, who 
never do any thing without my advice but what 
ends in folly, had like to have got us all into a 
fine scrape; for no sooner had you departed 
on that silly speculation to Amsterdam, than the 
earl sends a command to have the gold chain he 
bespoke conveyed to him immediately ; he de- 
signed it as a gift to some one as a mark of 
peculiar favour. The chain was not to be found. 
When I, knowing it was for a prince, conde- 
scended to give myself some trouble to inquire 
about it. I then found it had been bought^ but 
not paid for, by Philip Von Artaveld, for his 
mistress. The earl was in a great rage because 
the chain did not appear at his command. 
Bianca declared it was her's ; and Philip Von 
Artaveld^ so far from insisting upon its return, 
offered the money to pay for it. The earl 
threatened us, and you. Sir Simon, with your 
wise dealings in prince's concerns, you he espe- 



44 THE WHITE HOODS. 

cially threatened with all the chastisement your 
folly deserved. So I this day took advantage of 
Philip Von Artaveld's being absent from Ghent, 
and sought the house of the wicked, where I 
soon made Mistress Bianca, with all her assur- 
ance, yield up the chain to me ; and there it is," 
continued Lady Judith, as she took it from under 
her gown, and threw it upon the table ; " but 
now, Sir Simon, call the varlet; bid him bring me 
water to wash, for my very hands seem polluted 
at having touched a thing that came from the 
wanton's neck ; pha, they are quite impure ; * for 
who shall touch pitch and not be defiled.' 
Call the varlet. Sir Simon, I say, and bid him 
bring me a ewer of water." 

Sir Simon obeyed as he was wont to do, and 
she, with many compliments to her own virtue, 
and many severe strictures upon all vices, and 
all vicious persons, washed her hands, and vowed 
she would not touch the chain again, even if the 
Earl of Flanders would bestow it upon her. 

Lady Judith was one of those outrageously 
virtuous persons^ who never find one touch of 
pity or of mercy for the sinner ; and who, being 



THE WHITE HOODS. 45 

either too acrimonious, or too disagreeable, ever 
to have been tempted beyond the sins which 
arise from their own vituperative humours, con- 
sider themselves as patterns of excellence, and 
miracles of virtue, upon which foundation they 
build their own authority for abusing, censuring, 
and condemning all the less immaculate part of 
mankind. 

Sir Simon de Bete, who wished for nothing 
so much as a fair opportunity to be clear of the 
presence of his wife^ eagerly snatched at that 
which now presented itself; and^ saying he would 
lose no time in sending the gold chain by a sure 
hand to the Earl of Flanders, with an explanation 
that it had in the first instance been sold by 
mistake, whilst he was at Amsterdam, the little 
goldsmith arose to depart, and John Lyon took 
leave of Lady Judith and followed him. Sir 
Simon whispered in the ear of his friend, as soon 
as the chamber-door was closed upon them, that 
they might now finish the evening at the Moon^ 
an inn in Ghent where strangers and citizens 
were wont to assemble to pass away a convivial 
hour. 



46 THE WHITE HOODS. 



CHAP. III. 

The Inn, which was known in Ghent by the 
appellation of the Hotel of the Moon^ (having a 
large painted sign of that planet hanging over 
the door-way of the ancient Gothic edifice^ where 
a bush also denoted wine was sold within,) stood 
in the market-place, and was alike frequented by 
strangers and citizens. The inns of the period 
of our narrative widely differed from the like 
public receptacles of the present time ; since they 
could not then, as they may be now, classed in 
the positive, comparative, and superlative degrees. 
They were places of rest alike for the traveller 
of high or low degree, and afforded a bench and 
a flagon, both to the chief citizen and the humble 
mechanic, without much distinction. 

The Hotel of the Moon was one of the largest 
and most frequented in Ghent, whose host and 
hostess, Gerard and Martha Van Dredgger, 
took especial care, that the good repute of the 



THE WHITE HOODS. 4T 

house should not suffer for want of attention. 
The husband, it is true, Hke most Flemish 
husbands of the lower order, suffered his wife to 
ply the labouring oar, whilst he did little else in 
the way of business than market for the wines, 
the corn and oats, spending the rest of his time, 
like a landlord who knew well his calling, by 
setting a proper example to his guests, to prove 
the goodness of the wines, or the true relish of 
his Dutch and French liqueurs, by drinking of 
them as hard and as long as he could, which 
Gerard often contrived to do at the expence of 
his guests, who repaid his communications in 
the way of city gossip, chit-chat, and politics, by 
making their host the sharer of their flagon. 

Dame Martha Van Dredgger was in herself 
the perfect representative and epitome of all 
good housewives in Flanders. She was a little, 
tidy, plump woman, with not one part of her 
figure differing from another, either in shape 
or circumference; all was equally round and 
protuberant. There was nothing about her of 
the long compressed waist of modern times, 
which, considering that so small a span is seen 



48 THE WHITE HOODS. 

between the projection of the person above and 
below^ makes us compare the figures of many of 
our fair countrywomen, of the present day, to 
that mischievous little insect called a wasp. 

Dame Van Dredgger fully supplied whatever 
deficiencies might exist on the part of her 
husband in industry and management; she 
bustled everywhere, and rested nowhere. The 
guests were sure of a well-cooked dinner, a good 
bed, with tables, cloths, and platters as clean or 
as white as the drifted snow, in the accommoda- 
tions afforded them by the hostess of the Moon ; 
who, dressed in a petticoat of blue cloth, with a 
red jacket and bodice trimmed with fur, was 
always ready to appear before her customers, and 
her plump fair face looked, as it shone with 
soap and smiles, very pleasant, and very civil, 
from beneath a cap of milk-white linen, whose 
chief ornament consisted of a broad piece of 
gold, which crossed the forehead, and covered 
either side the temples. A pair of long gold 
ear-rings that fell as low as the bosom, and a 
string of beads finished by a cross of the same 
material, hung round the neck, and shewed 



THE WHITE HOODS. 49 

that in this wealthy country, the precious metal, 
which excites the hopes of all^ and the madness 
of many, was commonly worn even by the less 
opulent ranks of society. A large bunch of 
keys, a rosary, and divers small useful imple- 
ments, such as scissars, a sheathed knife, &c.^ 
depended from the leathern girdle, which alone 
formed the indication that Martha Van Dredg- 
ger could be said to have any one part of her 
person which might be called the waist. 

The apartment, in which the guests generally 
found both their welcome and their entertain- 
ment^ was the spacious kitchen, a vaulted room 
supported by columns^ and of such extensive 
dimensions, that it served all culinary purposes, 
without interfering, even in the smallest degree, 
with the space necessary for the comfort of the 
guests, whose olfactory nerves were rather regaled 
than offended by the rich perfumes which 
ascended from the chimney, stoves, and ovens ; 
and to many of the Flemish or Dutch nation, 
this perfume was doubtless as acceptable as the 
savory smell of the flesh-pots of Camacho to the 
hungry Sancho Panza, whose scum of geese and 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE WHITE HOODS. 

capons that worthy pattern of squires to all 
knights-errant ladelled out with so much gastro- 
nomic alacrity. 

The kitchen of Dame Van Dredgger formed the 
territory, the sphere, and the glory of that busy 
and notable housewife. Beneath the clean white 
tables and dressers was seen, arranged in the 
utmost order upon the tiled pavement of the 
room, a whole armoury of brass pans^ copper 
pots, and other vessels, whose brilliant surface, 
from the frequent scrubbing and scouring of the 
Flemish maidens, had at length assumed the 
clearness and polish of so many mirrors. Upon 
one shelf, apart from the rest, appeared a few 
silver cups and flagons, intermixed with long 
drinking glasses of a white and green colour, 
and beneath was seen the vessels of pewter, 
which emulated in their polish even those of the 
rarer metal. A vast quantity of venison, game, 
dried fish, with ropes of onions and flasks of 
oil, hung from the ceiling in that part of the 
kitchen nearest to the entry ; and at the other 
extremity stood the chimney, where, with four 
or five spits, the one placed above the other, the 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 51 

cooks were busy in preparations for the evening- 
repast. A stove of considerable size stood in 
the centre of the room, around which the guests 
were wont to assemble in cold weather. A bas- 
ket-worked cradle in one corner, with a go-cart, 
and a low chair fixed upon a rocking bottom, 
formed like a boat_, proclaimed that the worthy 
hostess of the Moon was a mother. 

On the evening in which our narration com- 
menced, Gerald Van Dredgger, and a few of 
the mechanics of Ghent, were sitting in this 
kitchen, and enjoying themselves over the de- 
lights of a flagon of good liquor^ whilst engaged 
in settling the politics of the city ; for as that 
great help to getting through the leisure houre 
of an evening, tobacco smoking, was then un- 
known in Europe, social parties could not then 
occupy themselves in doing nothing, with their 
neighbours to help them. They could not then 
whiff and sit silent, in the midst of a cloud of 
rolling smoke, till their persons, like their ideas, 
became dim and misty, through the obscurity 
occasioned by drink and tobacco. 

Whilst Gerald was thus pleasantly engaged, 
e2 



U- W4- 



52 THE WHITE HOODS. 

he heard the well-known jingle of the large 
bunch of keys, which, like the bells of a waggon, 
constantly announced the approach of his spouse. 
" What, Gerald, what man," said his better 
half, as she bustled up towards him, " do you 
sit there tippling and talking, whilst there is a 
stranger at the door, who wants some one to bid 
him in^ and to look after his horse ; get up, take 
the beast to the stable yourself, or call the boy 
to do it, and I will see to the gentleman my- 
self." 

So saying, the hostess smoothed down her 
clothes, and, as she hastily passed by one of the 
long dressers, just paused to give a glance at 
herself in a piece of a broken mirror that stood 
by the side of an old comb, and a few crooked 
pins, upon one of the shelves. We suppose the 
glance was satisfactory, for Dame Van Dredgger 
looked uncommonly pleased as she smiled and 
courtsied, and courtsied and smiled, and ushered 
in the stranger to the kitchen or common hall of 
the inn. 

" You are welcome to Ghent, sir, welcome 
to the Moon," said the hostess ; " pray, sit down, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 53 

sir ; we have good beds, a table at eleven o'clock 
forenoons, stables, a tennis court, butts for 
archery, and every thing comfortable a gentle- 
man may desire. What would you please to 
take, sir ? a cup of Rhenish^ or of Piment? 
or perhaps you would like, sir, to taste our 
Amsterdam liqueurs ; we have them fresh im- 
ported, floating in the bottle, as clear as crystal, 
as bright as gold — the very best thing, they say, 
a gentleman can take after a long ride ; and per- 
haps you may have come from some distance, 
sir, for your boots and your horse are covered 
with dust." 

This salutation of the hostess of the Moon 
was so rapidly given, that the stranger could not 
edge in a word in reply, and indeed he seemed 
to be very sparing of words when he did reply 
to it, as he very briefly told the hostess, that his 
stay would not be long, and that he wished to be 
private. The stranger was a young man of a 
fine person, and easy address^ yet his attire was 
rather plain for such a wearer, since it consisted 
of nothing more than a green cloth riding suit, 
with a hood instead of a chaperon upon the 
E 3 



54 THE WHITE HOODS. 

head, which the traveller^ contrary to the usual 
custom, did not remove upon coming within 
doors ; indeed he seemed desirous to shun obser- 
vation, and his hood was drawn much closer than 
ordinary about the head and face. 

Now whether these circumstances, or the fine 
tall person and noble manner of the stranger, 
or the brevity of his speech, or all of them toge- 
ther, with no small share of that curiosity which 
is said to be inherent in the gentler sex, excited 
in the bosom of Martha Van Dredgger a desire 
to know who her guest might be, or not, we 
cannot determine, but certain it is she tried all 
her simple arts, in the way of civility, to find 
him out. ^' She hoped he was not tired, as, if 
he had come from Oudenarde or Courtray, the 
ways were rough." 

The stranger answered " No." 

She wondered how the people had got on at 
Bruges in the late dry weathei', since there was 
no river in that town, nor fountains, and only 
the water brought by pipes from a distance.* 

* Martha was quite right, since the fine canal which now 
runs from Ghent to Bruges, and waters that town, was not 
made till 1613. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 55 

The stranger could not tell. 

Again, " She wondered how the people of Lille 
liked the Earl of Flanders living so much near 
Ghent as he had done since the death of his 
countess, instead of staying in their city." 

The stranger was unable to determine. 

^« She would like to know if the late Jacob 
Von Artaveld was quite forgotten at Tournay ; 
or if they ever spoke of his son who was in 
Ghent ?" 

Any news of the deceased father at Tournay, 
or of the living son at Ghent, were both equally 
unknown to the stranger. In short, after as 
many traps and baits as the hostess of the Moon 
could, consistent with civility, lay abroad to 
catch her guest in some acknowledgment of who 
he was, or where he came from, her curiosity 
was all at once silenced by his desiring that she 
would shew him into some private chamber, 
where he might that night have a bed, as he 
expected his varlet would soon follow with 
another horse and the baggage. 

The words varlet and baggage brought to the 
E 4 



56 THE WHITE HOODS. 

mind of the hostess an additional sense of the 
consequence of her guest, and she even thought 
that she might have been a little too free, and 
have talked a little too much, but instantly obey- 
ing his command, she led the way up a circular 
staircase that stood near the side of the kitchen, 
and led to a railed gallery that looked down 
upon it, and crossed the whole apartment near 
the vaulted roof. Having conducted her guest 
along this gallery, she opened a door at the ex- 
tremity which led to a passage, giving access to 
the various sleeping rooms in the inn. Into one 
of these the stranger entered. 

The hostess then busied herself in putting 
several little things to rights in the room that 
needed no such attention, till the stranger, pull- 
ing out a pocket-book with blank leaves, and 
an inkhorn, sat down to a table as if to write, 
and civilly dismissed his landlady. 

" An odd sort of a stranger this," murmured 
Martha, as she descended the stairs ; " a comely 
youth though, for all that, but close as oak, 
and no more inclined to talk than my good man 



THE WHITE HOODS. 57 

is when fuddled with an extra pint or so ; but 
the varlet will be here soon, and I will get it 
all out of him." 

Scarcely had Martha reached the kitchen, 
when a smart, spruce^ young man came into it, 
and inquired if a stranger, habited in a green 
cloth riding suit, was already arrived. The 
hostess answered in the affirmative ; " and the 
stranger in the green riding suit," she added_, 
" I take to be your master, friend." 

" It is very possible," replied the young man, 
carelessly. 

" Humph ! very possible," muttered Martha. 
" A queer answer ; like master like man, I take 
it. Your master seems to be tired with his 
journey, friend ; he has come a long way, I sup- 
pose," added the inquisitive hostess aloud. 

" Just as far as his horse's legs carried him," 
said the varlet ; " please to prepare us a good 
supper ; let your capon be sauced with Dutch 
oysters : put a flagon of Rhenish on the table ; 
see that our horses be taken care of; and whilst 
this is doing, shew me the way to the gentleman 
in the green riding suit." 



58 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" A pretty way of ordering one about, indeed, 
(and for a varlet too,)" again muttered Martha, 
and then added aloud — "I am no hostler, 
friend ; you must talk to my husband about 
brute beasts and cattle. And I am not used to 
wait upon serving varlets as if they were their 
masters ; if you want your's, you may find him 
by walking up those stairs, cross the gallery, 
and the first door on the left hand is his room." 

Scarcely had the busy hostess dismissed this 
second impenetrable stranger, and ordered the 
supper, when Gilbert Matthew, the new deacon 
of the pilots, his brother Stephen, and Peter 
their kinsman, entered the inn. The hostess 
who was well aware (from the news that every 
day circulated in her house) of the late changes, 
and that John Lyon was displaced from his 
lucrative station of deacon, and Gilbert ap- 
pointed to succeed him, now made up to the 
new court favourite, with a curtesy and a smile 
set between every word of civility and welcome, 
and immediately conducted him to the large 
high-backed chair near the stove, which was 
held to be the most honourable seat in the com- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 59 

men hall. Martha was, indeed^ doubly busied 
in making her new guest welcome, since she 
knew well how bright was the face of his fortunes 
at the present time. Thus does prosperity, like 
a summer sun, make all surrounding objects 
smile upon it, whilst adversity, like the nipping 
frost, often gives birth only to chilling looks and 
biting coldness. Gilbert Matthew, his brother, 
and their kinsman, drank their wine without 
noticing any one present, and seemed engaged 
in earnest conference, whilst they looked over 
some papers that Gilbert had taken from his 
pocket. Gerard, the host, returned to his flagon 
and his companions ; and Dame Martha busied 
herself in alternately scolding the cooks, in a 
small sharp under-voice, lest she should disturb 
her company, and in watching Gilbert, to see if 
she could offer any officious civility. Things 
were in this positicm when the door of the inn 
was swung open with some bustle, and the 
burgomaster, Sir Simon de Bete, followed by 
John Lyon, entered the kitchen. 

Sir Simon, who had been accustomed to 
receive the utmost deference and civility of treat- 



60 THE WHITE HOODS. 

ment^ both from the host and hostess and their 
company, was rather an inopportune visitor at 
the present moment, for the chair of state, which 
from time immemorial had been considered as 
his own in this house, was already disposed of 
to Gilbert Matthev/, and the hostess (who knew 
exactly how to deal out her proportions of atten- 
tion and civility to persons in place, and to per- 
sons out of place,) was most anxious to cultivate 
the good-will of Gilbert, whilst she was now 
grown rather careless towards John Lyon; and 
Sir Simon's bringing with him a man upon 
whom all wise people had now begun to turn 
their backs, (for most disgraced court favourites 
are apt to grow better acquainted with the 
shoulders than with the faces of their sun-shine 
friends,) was a circumstance which put the con- 
duct of the worthy hostess upon her very nicest 
tact. 

She wanted to shew to Gilbert Matthew that 
she cared not the value of a brass pan if John 
Lyon ever tasted wine again in her house or not, 
yet she wished to preserve the favour of such a 
wealthy and important personage as Sir Simon ; 



THE WHITE HOODS. 61 

and wholly to neglect his friend and companion 
was not the way to do this. She therefore resolved 
to steer a middle course, and to keep both sides 
in view. 

Yet still not daring to displace Gilbert Mat- 
thew^ who took no notice of the entrance of the 
last guests, and being fearful to offend Sir Simon 
by offering him any less honourable seat than that 
of the great high-backed chair, she prudently 
resolved to forget to offer him any at all, and 
to leave the knight to seat himself as he could. 
Stepping, therefore, briskly up to him, she 
assured him, " how glad she was to see him look 
so well ; what would he like to take ? what could 
she get for him ?" And as the politic hostess 
was within the hearing of Gilbert, she resolved 
to place her notice of John Lyon solely to the 
score of his coming with Sir Simon; ^' any 
body," she said, " that he was pleased to bring 
with him must be welcome to her house, let 
them be who they would, or what they would, 
she was sure Sir Simon's friends ought to have 
every civility for Sir Simon's sake." 

" And pray, dame," cried the knight, who 



62 THE WHITE HOODS, 

saw which way she steered, as plainly as the 
mariner can tell when a ship at sea is making 
her tack to catch a side-wind, " and pray, dame, 
why may not Master John Lyon be here wel- 
come for his own sake^ he is no such stranger to 
the Moon, I think. And you, Gilbert Matthew, 
must have learned before now the seat that 
belongs to one of the chief magistrates of Ghent. 
Please to get up, young man ; there are stools 
high enough, and large enough, to contain the 
green honours of a new sprig just planted in his 
office." 

Sir Simon had been much offended at the 
want of the usual respect with which he was 
accustomed to be received, and as he was not a 
man to desert a friend because fortune had 
turned her back upon him, he felt very bitter 
against Gilbert for his conduct towards John 
Lyon. And it must also be confessed, that his 
having been so lately turned out of his own seat 
at home, made him yet more tenacious of 
retaining his right and privilege over the high- 
backed chair at the Moon ; for feeling how much 
he suffered from the despotism of his own wife, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 63 

he was wont, as a sort of remuneration towards 
his own self-respect, to exact from others abroad 
that passive obedience he was obliged to yield 
to the tyranny of petticoat government at 
home. 

Gilbert Matthew, who to a large share of cun- 
ning imited a spirit of subserviency to his supe- 
riors, when he could profit by it, and of insolence 
to his inferiors, and even to his equals, when he 
had nothing to fear from them, saw well enough 
that Sir Simon's notice of John Lyon would do 
him no good with the court party at this time ; 
he scrupled not, therefore, to indulge the inso- 
lence of his temper, by shewing disrespect 
towards Sir Simon himself. And his new station 
of deacon of the pilots had helped to swell out 
his pride, (which had hitherto, in his humbler 
fortunes, shewn itself but capable of inflation,) in 
the same way that a sudden strong wind fills and 
swells out the sails of a vessel, which till it arose 
had only fluttered in the breeze. 

Gilbert Matthew kept his seat, and looking 
boldly and stedfastly in Sir Simon's face, as if 
he scarcely knew him, and had not even a cor- 



64 THE WHITE HOODS. 

rect remembrance of his name, (so true is it, 
" that nev^^-made honour doth forget men's 
names/') he said, " Sir Timothy de Bete, be 
you magistrate or not in Ghent, I care not, this 
seat I took before you entered the room, and 
this seat I shall keep till I depart from it ; the 
stools you speak of may suit the length of your 
legs better than they do mine." 

There is nothing more galling to self-conse- 
quence than any reflection upon disadvantages of 
person. Sir Simon reddened with wrath at this 
scoff cast upon the diminutive size of the sup- 
porters of his dignity. His words burst from his 
lips in a torrent of anger, as he again commanded 
Gilbert to rise and give up the seat. Gilbert 
answered with yet greater insolence ; and John 
Lyon could no longer forbear taking part with 
his insulted friend. " Gilbert Matthew," said 
he, " if you have no respect for the worthy Sir 
Simon de Bete, who all Ghent knows to be a 
good man — " 

" Aye," exclaimed Sir Simon, " as good and 
as substantial as any one who walks the exchange 
of Ghent, Bruges, or Antwerp to boot." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 65 

'< Gilbert," continued John Lyon, " give up 
the seat, if it be only from that respect which is 
due to a burgomaster. And your kinsman 
there, Peter Matthew, might as well doff his 
cap, for when did a burgher keep it on before 
his town magistrate, if he knew what breeding 
was." 

'* I shall doff my cap, or keep on my cap," 
replied Peter, as he raised his hand and clapt it 
upon the crown of his cap, " to whom I please, 
and before whom I please. You had better, 
John Lyon, teach manners to those two 
strangers who are just come down the stairs, 
and are leaving the hall ; the one in the green 
riding dress, I mean, and his companion." 

'' They know better manners than you do, 
Peter," answered John Lyon, " for they bowed 
their heads to the company, although they did 
not doff their caps as they passed out." 

'^' You had better call them back to hear your 
comment. Master Deaco7i-turned out," said Peter, 
insolently ; " that, as they are travellers, they 
may know you are now a man at large, with 
nothing else to do than teach courtesies to 

VOL. I. F 



66 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Strangers, for it will not do to begin the trade 
with us citizens." 

John Lyon was not a man without passions, 
any more than his friend^ and a war of words 
now hotly ensued between all parties; for 
Stephen Matthew had by this time also joined 
in the quarrel, till Sir Simon quite lost temper, 
and made a desperate effort fairly to pull Gilbert 
out of the chair, whilst, at the same moment, 
John Lyon attempted to knock Peter Matthew's 
cap off his head. In the scuffle the little gold- 
smith was upset, and, rolling like a ball some 
paces forward, a table was overturned, which, 
amongst other things, contained a flask of oil, 
whose contents found their way over the face, 
beard, and dress of the worshipful burgomaster, 
and whilst John Lyon went to help him up, 
Peter came behind him and tripped up the heels 
of the ex-deacon, who shared the fate of his 
fallen friend. No sooner had they once more 
found their feet^ than they both united in the 
effort to turn their adversaries out of the room, 
and called upon Gerard and his companions for 
assistance. 

4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 6t 

The confusion was now general ; some came to 
the help of Sir Simon, some stood up for Gilbert 
Matthew, and a few remained neuter, staring in 
silent wonder at what passed ; whilst the hostess 
crossed herself, and blessed herself^ to think such 
a fray should happen in her house. The noise 
of what was going forward had alarmed every 
one within doors, and a boy who had been below 
doing something in a cellar, that communicated 
with the kitchen by a steep flight of stone steps, 
upon hearing the bustle came up to witness it, 
and left the cellar door open after him. 

" Out with them," cried Sir Simon, as he laid 
about him several smart blows with his little 
stout fists. 

'* Out with them — turn the rascals out," re- 
echoed John Lyon, " I will not see my friend 
insulted by the proudest upstart in Ghent." 

" Call the round," exclaimed the hostess, 
*^ call the city watch, or there will be murder 
done amongst them ; go, boy, call the watch, 
they must be on by this time ; go, bring them 
hither." 

F 2 



68 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" Respect the burgomaster — do not strike a 
magistrate, Gilbert," said the host. 

^* He has not honour enough to respect any 
one^" exclaimed John Lyon, who was now at- 
tempting to free Sir Simon from the hold of 
Peter, as he came to the help of Gilbert. 

" Talk about your own honour, John Lyon," 
said Peter ; ^« but I fancy you put that in pawn 
for a bag of old crowns, when you sold your 
daughter's to the Earl of Flanders." 

" Insolent villain !" exclaimed John Lyon ; 
" I sell my daughter's honour^ or my own ! it is 
a lie as foul as the mouth that spoke it ; say but 
such another word, and I will knock you down^ 
though you should die by the blow." 

" I say it, and I know it too," answered 
Peter. 

'' Take that then^" said John Lyon, and he 
struck Peter a powerful blow upon the head. 
Peter, who at this moment unfortunately stood 
near the opening of the door above the steps 
which led to the cellar, staggered^ and in doing 
so pushed against Sir Simon de Bete ; who. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 69 

thinking it intentional, slipt aside before Peter 
could recover his equilibrium, and he fell back- 
wards down the steep flight of stone steps. The 
noise occasioned by his sudden and dreadful fall, 
was followed by a deep groan that struck with 
terror upon the ear of the enraged disputants, 
whose wrath being suddenly and effectually 
subdued by this horrid and unexpected con- 
clusion of their quarrel, they rushed down the 
steps with one accord to see if Peter were alive 
or dead. 

What followed may be briefly told. In a few 
minutes, Peter was brought up into the apart- 
ment, and after many efforts being made to 
restore life, they were found to be useless^ the 
vital spark was extinct, for the wretched man 
having fallen backwards, the neck was dislocated 
by the shock he had received. 

By this time the city watch had arrived. 
John Lyon and Simon de Bete, who, whilst 
they deeply regretted the fatal issue of the 
quarrel^ and knew themselves to be innocent of 
the intentional death of their adversary ; yet, at 
the same time, they feared that with such persons 
f3 



TO THE WHITE HOODS. 

to deal with as Stephen and Gilbert Matthew, 
the consequences of the present aflPray might be 
fatal to themselves. John Lyon, therefore, who 
had been the imhappy instrument of this sad 
catastrophe, now whispered in the ear of Sir 
Simon, that he would endeavour to slip out, 
and either take sanctuary in the church of St. 
Nicholas hard by, or seek shelter with a friend, 
who, he knew, could conceal him for the present : 
and Sir Simon, who, with all his importance, 
thought, " the better part of valour was dis- 
cretion," resolved to follow his example, and to 
steal away as fast as he could, and trust his future 
and entire acquittal in this affair, both to his 
own innocence, and to his character and conse- 
quence in the city. 

The body soon afterwards was removed into 
an adjoining chamber ; where a barber surgeon, 
who was called in, thought he might as well 
exercise a little practice in pretending to recover 
life, which, as he knew the man was really dead, 
could do no harm to him, and might put a 
crown into his own pocket. Whilst this was 
doing, John Lyon quietly slipt out of the house 



THE WHITE HOODS. 71 

just as the watch was bustling into it, and got 
clear ofF into the street. But when Sir Simon de 
Bete made an attempt to follow his example, 
his unwieldy bulk prevented any very active 
effort to seize upon a lucky opportunity ; so that 
before he could reach the threshold, he was 
espied by Gilbert, who had returned to the 
kitchen, seized by the collar, and dragged back 
into the apartment, whilst the new deacon 
loudly accused him of being one of the murderers 
of his kinsman. 

"la murderer of your kinsman ! I/' cried 
Sir Simon, who, between the fear of his present 
situation, and the indignation he felt that all 
personal respect towards himself should be laid 
aside, presented in his own person the most 
ludicrous combination of fear and importance, 
" I am as innocent as the babe unborn," con- 
tinued he ; "for the love of mercy let me go ; I 
say, let me go, or you shall know to your cost 
who and what I am." 

" We know that already/' said Gilbert, " for 
you are both accessory, aye and principal too, in 
the murder of my kinsman ; you are my prisoner, 
F 4 



72 THE WHITE HOODS. 

and on my accusation. Which of these men is 
the watch for the city ?" 

" That am I," said Timothy Vanderblast, a 
glass-blower of Ghent, who now stept forward ; 
" that am I ; what may be your pleasure ?" 

<' That you take in charge the prisoner, and 
receive my brief deposition, upon which your 
authority will rest for his imprisonment this 
night." 

Timothy Vanderblast, who knew perfectly 
well Sir Simon de Bete, and had sometimes 
been accustomed to appear before him in his 
official capacity in the town-hall, and who there 
looked up to him as little less than the Earl of 
Flanders himself in rank and dignity, seemed 
now absolutely petrified at the words which met 
his ear ; and turning towards Gilbert Matthew, 
he asked him, " What he wished him to do ?" 

^' That you do your duty," replied Gilbert, 
" and apprehend the prisoner on my charge of 
murder." 

" What !" said the city watch, " apprehend 
the worshipful Sir Simon de Bete ! the burgo- 
master of our ward ! The saints forbid. I have 



THE WHITE HOODS. 73 

not been in my office so many years, and know 
no better than that, either." 

" It is your duty, as the watch/* replied Gil- 
bert, " to apprehend all persons charged with 
crime." 

" Is it the law ?" inquired the host. 

" It is the law," answered Gilbert. 

'^ No doubt, no doubt,'' said Timothy, " for 
rogues and conflicted malefactors ; but not law, 
I think, to meddle with magistrates upon. I 
thank you, Master Gilbert, for teaching me my 
calling." 

" Fellow !" exclaimed Gilbert, " do your duty, 
or the Earl shall hear what sort of an officer he 
has." 

" Fellow, indeed !" said Vanderblast, who 
felt encouraged in his proceeding by the nods, 
winks, and approving jogs of the elbow which 
he received from time to time from Sir Simon, 
who stood near him ; "no more a fellow than 
yourself. Master Matthew, but as sober and as 
honest a man as any one of his calling in Ghent ; 
and not a man to be dictated to by you. Master 
Gilbert, nor to be blown up by such a puff as 



74 THE WHITE HOODS. 

you would send through his good name. The 
Earl of Flanders, forsooth ! The Earl's officer, 
I would have you to know, knows how to respect 
persons as well as the Earl himself." 

« You are a fool," said Gilbert ; " but I 
insist, and I call upon every one here present 
to bear witness that I insist, upon your receiving 
my deposition." 

" And mine," said Stephen, '' or you shall be 
whipped out of your office for shewing favour in 
despite of justice." 

" God forbid !" answered Vanderblast, " but 
that favour and j ustice should be properly repre- 
sented in my person, both being things pertain- 
ing to the law — the one being special with the 
judges, and the other with the hangman : and 
'tis most fitting justice should always come by 
favour, as all other of God's graces do. I will, 
therefore, take all your dispositions^ for the sake 
of justice, which may be condemned therein." 

Timothy Vanderblast being accordingly seated 
in the high-backed chair, which had originally 
occasioned the dispute so tragically terminated, 
proceeded in the business in an official manner, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 75 

according to his notion of that term. " And 
now. Sir Simon," said Timothy^ " be so good as 
to tell your own story ?" 

" What," cried Gilbert, " hear the prisoner 
.first ! He is the accused person — let me 
speak." 

'^ Peace !" said Vanderblast ; '' peace ! I 
know what belongs to a judge — respect of per- 
sons. Respect of persons is a part of the law. 
Sir Simon, being your better, shall speak first, 
prisoner or no prisoner : and while he disposes 
his own cause, do you please, Master Gilbert, to 
walk into the other chamber, for the law sunders 
the witnesses for the sake of its jurisprudence ; 
therefore the accused and the accuser must be 
held apart, and the accused shall speak first, if 
it were only for the love of justice ; as 'tis hard 
to bear down a falling man, and most specially 
if he be a knight and a magistrate." 

Gilbert Matthew, who saw the folly of the 
procedure, and that it was vain to hold debate 
with ignorance and obstinacy combined, now 
whispered something in the ear of his brother 
Stephen, who immediately departed from the 



76 THE WHITE HOODS. 

inn, and before Timothy Vanderblast could hear 
out the assertions made by Sir Simon of his 
perfect innocence, in respect of the charge laid 
against him, Stephen returned with the chief 
constable of the city watch, and the guard. 

The affair was now speedily settled ; and not- 
withstanding all the efforts made by Sir Simon 
to declare his innocence, or to procure a ces- 
sation of measures till the next mornings when 
he promised to give security for his appearance 
before his peers in the town-hall, he was carried 
off, and by the order of Gilbert Matthew (who, 
as a new court favourite, had much influence 
with the chief constable,) Sir Simon was that 
night secured within the prisons of the Earl of 
Flanders : so many and so various are the tricks 
by which fortune humbles the pride of the 
wealthy, and confounds innocence with guilt. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 77 



CHAP. IV. 

Having seen the unfortunate little burgomaster, 
Sir Simon de Bete, placed within the prisons of 
the Earl of Flanders, and John Lyon secured for 
the present by his escape from the vengeance of 
Gilbert Matthew and his brothers, we shall now 
leave them for a while, in order to introduce to 
our reader Anna, the only child of John Lyon, 
with whom it is time he should become ac- 
quainted. 

Anna was about nineteen years old, and 
although born in Ghent, had been educated in 
France, under the care of an aunt, who had 
taken upon herself the maternal functions, when 
her niece was deprived, by the early death of 
her mother, of that care and superintendence 
which no other person can so well bestow upon 
infancy. 

This worthy relative resided about two leagues 
from St. Omer's, where she had brought up her 



78 THE WHITE HOODS. 

niece in the utmost seclusion; for, excepting 
the priest who instructed her in reading and 
writing, and an old minstrel who was allowed to 
teach her to play upon the rebec and the lute, 
for many years she had scarcely seen a living 
creature, saving her aunt, their few domestics, 
a single friend, and now and then a peasant of 
the neighbouring village, or a poor person who 
came to ask alms at their door. 

Within the last two years John Lyon, who 
considered his daughter's education (which was 
very superior for the time) must be now com- 
plete, desired the solace of her company, and 
therefore recalled her home to Ghent : and 
feeling anxious she should know something of 
that world to which she had hitherto been such 
an entire stranger, with all a father's pride John 
had introduced her to many of the families of 
the chief citizens of Ghent, as well as to the 
court of the Earl of Flanders, and to the Earl's 
mother, Margaret Countess of Artois ; for at the 
period of our narrative, the chief citizens of the 
Low Countries had access to the courts of their 
lords as well as the nobility, so great was their 



THE WHITE HOODS. 79 

opulence, and so important that commercial 
character by which the country was supported. 

Anna was everywhere received with marked 
respect and admiration. The uncommon beauty 
of her person, her few but rare accomplish- 
ments, united with the sweetness of her temper, 
and the artless simplicity of her manners, pro- 
cured her so much affection and regard, that 
she became an object of envy and jealousy with 
many of the more nobly born, but less nobly 
endowed ladies of the court. Anna was of a 
light and delicate figure, gracefully formed, and 
exactly proportioned. Her hair and complexion, 
I'ke those of the generality of her countrywomen, 
were of the palest brown, and of the fairest 
hue, and the regular life which she had hitherto 
led in the country, whilst it had confirmed her 
health, had also given to her beautiful counte- 
nance that bloom and animation, which nothing 
else can so perfectly bestow. Her features 
were small and regular ; her eyes, of the deepest 
blue, expressed the tender character of her dis- 
position, and whenever she smiled, it shewed so 
pretty a dimple in one of her cheeks, that, if we 



80 THE WHITE HOODS. 

were inclined to be poetical, we should say^ it 
looked as if it had been there imprinted by the 
finger of love to mark her for his own. 

Such was the casket in which it had pleased 
Heaven to place the rare jewel of her mind. 
Anna was naturally good^ open-hearted, and 
tender, with a more than ordinary share of 
timidity, which had been fostered by the secluded 
manner of her education. But what might 
have been deemed an advantage to most females 
in early life, entire seclusion, with her perhaps 
had been prejudicial ; since it had fostered not 
only her timidity, but an uncommonly imagina- 
tive turn of mind : and as all persons endowed 
with that finer quality of the soul, are invariably 
prone to romance, or the beau ideal of things, 
her imagination, uncorrected by an intercourse 
with the world, (which is perhaps the most 
certain remedy against the charming dreams it 
creates,) had led her to expect human life and 
its events to be modelled after the manner in 
which her vivid conception had presented them 
to her mind ; where romance had thrown around 
her an existence all sunshine, beauty, and inno- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 81 

cence. She suspected no one of guile, she 
thought no one capable of treachery, and, almost 
unconscious of the motive, she resolved to look 
upon the world, and all things in it, such as her 
fancy had delighted to pourtray. 

Such was Anna at the time she returned to 
her father's house at Ghent. The first mortifi- 
cation she experienced, which somewhat inter- 
fered with her visionary schemes of happiness, 
was to find the character of her father so different 
to what she had thought it would be. She had 
imagined to herself all the reciprocal tenderness, 
open confidence, and mutually noble and dis- 
interested feelings existing between father and 
daughter^ the one all condescension and kind- 
ness, the other all piety and filial obedience. 
How, therefore, was poor Anna mortified, when 
she found her own father proud of her, but as 
the means to assist his ambitious and daring 

o 

aims, without much tenderness in any other 
view; wholly withdrawing his confidence from 
her, mysterious in his manners, and treating all 
those fine imaginations and sensations of her 
mind, (which to her were the life of life,) as 

VOL. I. G 



82 THE WHITE HOODS. 

follies, dreams, and only worthy the ridicule of 
a sensible man. This was a death-blow to the 
ingenuous feelings of Anna. Kindness would 
have made her heart open as the eye of the 
morning to welcome and reflect the first beams 
of the sun ; but coldness and ridicule awakened 
the timidity of her character, chilled and closed 
her confidence; and, finding she had feelings 
which could not be understood, the pride of 
human nature, which exists even in the best 
heart, made her keep locked within her own 
bosom the thoughts that were answered but 

o 

with contempt. Anna loved and reverenced 
John Lyon as her father ; but she was too 
much awed by the sternness and severity of his 
nature to make him her friend. 

Upon the eventful evening, which has hitherto 
occupied the previous chapters, Anna was seated 
in an apartment of her father's house in Ghent, 
which John Lyon had exclusively appropriated 
for his daughter, and which in our times would 
be called by a lady her boudoir. Her lute and 
rebec lay upon a table, near which a few manu- 
script volumes, that formed her library, were 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 83 

placed within a fine cabinet of Indian manufac- 
ture. These volumes consisted of the lives of some 
of the most eminent catholic saints, a book of 
songs, virelays and roundelays, a few of the 
Italian poets, (for Anna was not ignorant of 
their language,) and a little illuminated book, 
which she prized more than all the rest, as it 
contained the songs and poems of a friend who 
had written them out for her^ and had caused 
the work to be thus illustrated to enhance the 
value of the gift. A crucifix^ with a missal lying 
near its base, was seen in a small recess of the 
chamber, and a frame containing a piece of 
tapestry, upon which the taste and industry of 
the fair Anna was exercised, stood near the grated 
window. 

The lovely mistress of the chamber sat in a 
thoughtful posture, with her arm that supported 
her head resting upon the table^ and in her 
hand she held a letter, which she had just been 
reading with attention. 

Anna was attired in a gown of black velvet, 
embroidered with gold, yet simple in its fashion. 
It had only the tight sleeves as low as the wrist, 
G 2 



84 THE WHITE HOODS. 

without the incumbrance of those long and 
hanging ones, which sometimes served the ladies 
for the purpose of a pocket, as well as a part of 
ornamental dress. The gown, set close to her 
shape, and terminating just above the bosom, 
left the neck bare, whose clear and transparent 
hue was finely contrasted by the deep rich black 
of the velvet. Her hair, parted in front, turned 
up, and bound together at the back of the head, 
(whose form was perfectly seen by this simple 
fashion,) was covered by a thin veil of silver 
tissue, and encircled with a fillet, or chaplet, of 
pearls. 

Anna again opened and read her letter. 
She mused, and after a time started from her 
seat, and seemed listening as if to catch some 
sound she anxiously expected to hear. Again 
she sighed, and returned to her seat ; but still 
restless and uneasy, she now paced the chamber, 
now walked towards the windows, and again 
listened at the door. At length she exclaimed, 
" Yes, I am sure I heard footsteps below ! — 
Yes, they are coming this way, it is — it must 
be " Her hands, as she held them pressed 



THE WHITE HOODS. 85 

together, trembled with emotion, and scarcely 
able to support herself, she leaned against the 
chair she had but just quitted, when the door of 
her apartment opened^ and a tall comely youth, 
habited in a green riding dress, entered. 

" Henry !" ejaculated Anna, in a faint voice ; 
" Henry ! why, why do you seek me again, when 

you know " Her agitation was too great to 

allow her to finish the sentence, and she only 
added the words " my father." 

"I know," replied Henry, " I know all you 
would urge ; that I am to hope nothing from 
you, without the approval of your father ; I ask 
nothing of you, but to see me. I arrived but an 
hour since in Ghent, when I wrote you that 
letter from the inn, that I might not too much 
surprise you by my presence. Jaques delivered 
it with all the caution necessary. You have 
granted me this interview; hear me then, I beseech 
you." 

'^ I fear," said Anna mournfully, <^ I fear I 
have already heard too much ; leave me, Henry, 
leave me, I conjure you." 

" Never," replied the youth, whom she ad- 
g3 



86 THE WHITE HOODS. 

dressed; " I will never leave you, till 1 have 
some assurance, that two years of absence, (and 
of misery they have been to me,) has not entirely 
effaced from your remembrance those delightful 
hours we passed together in the woods of St. 
Omer's, when Anna would come to meet me 
under the old oak tree in the evening, as kind, 
as innocent, and as affectionate " 

" Oh ! do not name the past," said Anna, 
interrupting him ; " all things are changed now. 
I then knew nothing of the world ; I met you by 
chance in the forest, when I was but a mere girl ; 
you managed to gain access to my aunt ; you 
were a student of St. Omer's, and she loved you 
for your learning, and thought, kind and simple 
as she was, that your society could benefit me ; 
but she knew not how dangerous to future 
happiness are such friendships and such meet- 
ings, or you would never have been admitted, as 
you were, to us. And now my father " 

" Has recalled you home, Anna, and you 
refuse to hear me till I shall have gained his 
approval ; is it not so ?" 

" It is indeed, Henry; I cannot hide the 



THE WHITE HOODS. 87 

truth. If you had his consent, you know you 
have mine already ; but you have never even 
sought my father ; you are as unknown to him as 
you are mysterious to me." 

" Nor must I see your father for the present," 
replied the lover : '' there are circumstances, 
which I cannot explain to you, that render it 
necessary for his sake, for your own, and for 
mine, that I should preserve^ what you too 
justly term, the mystery of my character. I am 
sincere to you, and I await but time, with the 
occasion, to overcome these circumstances, when 
I will openly ask, nay, claim you of your father 
as my wife." 

" How am I to trust you," said Anna, " when 
to me, in whom you might surely confide, you 
refuse to trust the plain and open truth, or to 
explain what these extraordinary circumstances 
are^ so dangerous in their nature. When I was 
a girl, I knew you but as Henry de Cassel, a 
student of St. Omer's. As such you came to our 
house ; but even then with caution and mystery. 
Your only attendant was your servant, and 
beyond your name we knew nothing of your 
G 4 



88 THE WHITE HOODS. 

family. I was too young, and my aunt too 
simple, to suspect you, till before I left her I 
begged you, as I was to return to my father's 
house^ that you would ask m^ of him, wishing 
that a parent's will might confirm our affection. 
You said you dared not do it then ; that your 
family must not be known to him ; then you 
talked about the future, just as you do now. 
I have learnt something of the world since my 
father took me to court — I have always found 
courtiers fond of mystery, and 1 have no cause to 
think them on this account the best people. I 
would have told my father the truth, but that I 
so much fear him, that when I would speak to 
him I cannot find the heart to say your name. 
And my father, too, " 

" What of him ?" hastily inquired the lover, 
who took alarm at the manner in which she pro- 
nounced the last words ; for lovers, like cowards, 
are frighted at a shadow. 

" Nay, Henry," said Anna, '' I may have my 
mystery as well as you may have yours, and you 
cannot expect a confidence from me which you 
refuse to return. But know this — that I have 



THE WHITE HOODS. 89 

reasons for thinking my father would not grant 
his consent^ even did you ask it, as you one day 
hope to do. Do not, therefore^ deceive your own 
heart, and thus render me doubly unhappy by 
keeping alive your own vain hopes. I have learnt 
since we parted what a dreamer imagination is, 
and I now begin to think hope no better than a 
flatterer^ who deceives us to our ruin.'* 

" Tell me, I beseech you," said Henry, '' tell 
me what has chanced ; do not torture me with 
this suspense ; tell me all^ and why you are thus 
changed ?" 

" I am not changed towards you," replied 
Anna, " but I am towards myself. I begin to 
suspect that this world is not either quite so 
happy, nor quite so good, as I once thought it. 
I have no mystery with you, Henry, about my- 
self, or as far as I am concerned, but I must 
not^ even to you, reveal that which would betray 
some affairs especially connected with my father. 
His confidence, however limited to me^ I will 
never betray, although it induces me to think 
you would have little or nothing to hope from 
him." 



90 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" But I will hope, Anna, until I am con- 
vinced you no longer feel an interest in my fate. 
Hear me. Circumstances of the most impera- 
tive nature exist, that for the present render it 
impossible I should be explicit, even to you : I 
will conquer them, or I will die in the attempt. 
Your father's day of prosperity is past, he is dis- 
graced with the Earl of Flanders, I know it is 
so ; he is ruined by the machinations of Gilbert 
Matthew ; it may be in my power to serve and 
to save your father, for Gilbert's malice will not 
stop at its present pass; and the Countess of 
Artois, who rules her son the earl with as much 
despotism as if he were still a boy, is no friend 
either to your father or to yourself." 

'« Gracious Heaven !" exclaimed Anna, ^^ why, 
who are you ? whence come you ? you know all 
our affairs, and yet it is two years since I have 
seen you, and you are but now arrived in Ghent. 
What does this mean ? you alarm me." 

" Be not alarmed ; it means nothing more, 
my sweet Anna^ than this, that although I have 
been compelled to remain at St. Omer's till the 
present time, I have not been unheedful of what 



THE WHITE HOODS. 



has passed in Ghent, when it contained my 
greatest treasure in yourself. I have had those 
in this city who have made known to me some 
things^ of which even you were ignorant. But 
think you, that a miser when he parts from his 
treasure, though but for a while^ would not place 
a guard over it to give him intelligence when 
danger might hover near it? No^ I have not 
been careless, nor in ignorance of what concerns 
you or your father. I heard of his disgrace, and 
hither am I come in the hope to serve him, 
although not openly. And notwithstanding you 
are so silent, Anna, it is not unknown to me, 
that the Countess of Artois is chiefly displeased 
with John Lyon, and angered with yourself, 
because the world whisper that her son, the Earl 
of Flanders, has more than once thought his 
coronet an incumbrance, since it prevented his 
offering his hand to the daughter of a burgher of 
Ghent — a little creature who wins alike the 
hearts of princes and of students." 

Anna blushed and looked down, but did not 
reply. 

«' I have no absolute fears of the rivalry of the 



92 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Earl of Flanders^" added Henry ; " he could not 
wed you, Anna, without the risk of forfeiting his 
dominions, and you have too much honour, as 
well as your father^ to yield to a lawless suit ; 
and, indeed, the disgrace of your father^ I have 
heard — but we will speak no more of this. 
When shall I see you again, and where ? Here 
I dare not stay long. Jaques is amusing your 
old housekeeper ; she thinks me some one from 
your aunt at Sf. Omer's, but I must be gone 
before your father's return. When shall I see 
you again ?" 

" Never/' said Anna ; *^ you still refuse to ask 
me of my father^ and I will not consent to the 
disgrace of clandestine meetings. I was but a 
child when we wandered together in the woods 
of St. Omer's, but time, that has given me many 
a heart-ache, with its lessons of experience, has 
also taught me it is dangerous to trust to our 
feelings." 

^' Nay," replied Henry, " it is useless thus to 
deny me ; I shall be near Ghent, and I will see 
you in spite of yourself. I have no thought but 
does you honour ; the time will come when I 



THE WHITE HOODS. 93 

shall both claim and receive you from your 
father. Why then should I be made a needless 
sufferer during the intermediate space ? Besides, 
your father's safety, even, may require that we 
should sometimes meet ; do not refuse me." 

" My father's safety," said Anna, " can never 
be insured by his daughter's disobedience. Leave 
me, I beseech you ; he will soon return. Your 
letter took me by surprise — I had not time for 
reflection — I granted hastily this interview, 
before he could return home, but here and now 
it must end." 

'^ Then it shall end, indeed," exclaimed 
Henry, extremely hurt by the resolute manner 
in which Anna dismissed him. " I see how it is : 
you are changed, time, new objects, or perhaps 
the court, has taught you to be indifferent 
towards me. And is this, Anna, the end of all 
your vows — of all your assurances of a mutual 
and faithful love ? Oh ! how different are your 
feelings from mine ! I am ready to risk every 
danger, to encounter every difficulty, only to 
see you, rather than again endure the misery, 
the suspense of absence. And can you so easily 



94 THE WHITE HOODS. 

part from me ? and for an unlimited period ? 
this is not duty, but coldness. But I see how 
it is, I have flattered myself with false hopes, 
by judging of the measure of your love by my 
own." 

Anna blushed^ hesitated, but her imagination 
now only pictured to her the sufferings of 
absence ; and unable to restrain her tears, she 
wept bitterly, and again assured Henry that he 
judged of her unkindly, as her heart was en- 
tirely his own. Delighted at receiving these 
renewed assurances of affection, he warmly 
thanked her for them ; and with all the sudden 
fluctuation of a lover's feelings, which can this 
moment give birth to angry reproaches, when 
hurt by some slight and often unintentional 
cause of offence, and can now rejoice upon the 
least shadow of hope, though but the shadow, 
Henry again urged permission sometimes to see 
her, if but for a few minutes, at any place she 
would appoint, and Anna, with evident reluc- 
tance, continued to deny her consent, but with a 
less firm and determined manner. The recti- 
tude of her principles taught her, that it would 



THE WHITE HOODS. 95 

be wrong to consent to this without the sanction 
of her father ; but when she looked upon the dis- 
tressed state of Henry, and saw his manly coun- 
tenance bedewed with tears, as he urged his past 
sufferings in mitigation of her future resolves, 
she could scarcely find it in her heart to give an 
absolute denial. 

" Anna," said Henry, " I have numbered the 
days and the weeks since last we parted, and 
with me one idea has been present at all times, 
in all places. I have thought upon you ; I have 
watched the sun as it set in the west, and recol- 
lected the time when we both did so at the same 
hour, and when our thoughts might be said to 
mingle in community. I have haunted the spot 
where we have so often passed hours together in 
the woods of St. Omer's, and I have wandered 
and thought again and again of you^ till even 
to the senseless trees I have spoken of my Anna. 
And how often has your image disturbed my 
slumbers ! and I have awoke feverish and unre- 
freshed, to begin another day of dreadful sus- 
pense, of doubtful anxiety. Do not, then^ I 
beseech you — can you — can you have the 



96 THE WHITE HOODS. 

heart again to make me suffer so much mi- 
sery ?" 

Thus did Henry^ with the sincerest affection, 
continue to urge his suit, and Anna, doubtful 
and wavering between love and duty, now listen- 
ing to the dictates of her reason, and now again 
giving herself up to the power of affection, 
replied she scarcely knew what, and had neither 
resolution absolutely to deny or to grant his 
request. 

Whilst this conversation was passing between 
the lovers, Jaques, the varlet of Henry de Cassel, 
was engaged in amusing old Catharine, the 
housekeeper of John Lyon. Jaques was a light 
French spirit of the brightest order, and whose 
wits had been sharpened by poverty and neces- 
sity, and refined beyond his station by more of 
education than usually belonged to his class. 
His master had found it absolutely necessary to 
trust some one with the secret of his passion for 
the beautiful Anna, and confiding in the fidelity 
of his varlet (of whose address he had also a high 
opinion), Jaques became the useful, confidential 
friend of his master, in an affair where a breach 



THE WHITE HOODS. 97 

of trust might have been most fatal to all con- 
cerned. Jaques had not been thus long the 
agent of two lovers, without knowing that a 
meeting between them, after a long absence, 
seems so short, that though it should last out the 
whole evening, it would still appear " brief as 
any dream." Old Catharine talked of expecting 
her master home, Jaques feared it, and longed 
to give the lovers some hint that it was time to 
part ; but not daring to betray his uneasiness to 
Catharine, he was obliged to sit still, internally 
chewing the cud of his own impatience. But as 
Jaques was one of those people, who, notwith- 
standing a gay spirit, have some share of com- 
mon sense, he plainly foresaw that his agency, 
now his master had arrived in Ghent, would 
not be suffered to slumber ; he therefore judged 
it as well to make use of the present opportunity 
to form a sort of acquaintance with old Catha- 
rine for the facility of his future affairs. 

Jaques knew the world very well in his own 
sphere, and no one could be a better judge of 
the weakest point in the heart of a waiting-maid, 
or of the most vulnerable in that of a cook. It 

VOL. I. H 



98 THE WHITE HOODS. 

is true his experience had hitherto principally 
lain with the younger part of the sex, but being 
so great a master of the art, he disdained not to 
shew his skill even with the elder. Jaques was 
aware that the generality of mankind, be they 
men or women, have some leading trait of cha- 
racter, which, if found out, the knowledge of it 
may be applied either for the purpose of sooth- 
ing or of irritating the mind. He also knew 
that human vanity is never insensible to flattery, 
yet even with the vainest, the dose must be given 
with some appearance of its being applicable to 
their case. Thus he never complimented an 
old woman on her beauty, lest the absurdity of 
his flattery should prevent its taking effect. But 
with a young woman, though her face should be 
formed in one of those moulds, as if nature in a 
frolic had been making a mask, he would con- 
gratulate her upon the grace and the expression 
of her countenance ; and he often made fools of 
the old by complimenting them upon their wis- 
dom. Indeed Jaques was so used to the cunning 
of flattery, that he had actually flattered himself^ 
and mistaken his own impudence of temper 

4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 99 

(which was often successful by its very boldness) 
for wit of the first quality. 

" And so^ young man," said old Catharine 
to this busy variety as, in pursuance of his plan, 
he officiously assisted her in renewing the kitchen 
fire, " you are come from our lady's aunt with 
messages. It is a pity you came when John 
Lyon was out, for your master up stairs 
seems to have a wond'rous long message to 
deliver. Pray, friend, do you know what it is 
about?" 

" No, dame, not exactly," replied Jaques, 
" although I think I could give a shrewd guess ; 
but you know serving varlets must keep the 
secrets of their masters, unless, indeed, a young 
man might hope to gain counsel for the sake of 
his betters, by telling it to such a sensible, dis- 
creet person as you seem to be." 

*' You are a very civil, well-spoken young 
man," said old Catharine, *^ and seem to have 
as pretty a notion about what belongs to your 
duty as ever I met with. Pray do me the favour 
to take a cup of wine ; it is bad talking with a 
dry throat, and apt to give the phthisic. I never 
H 2 



100 THE WHITE HOODS. 

talk so well myself as when I have tasted a cup 
of mulled wine." 

The housekeeper busied herself accordingly in 
getting some refreshment for Jaques, who pro- 
ceeded to amuse her with an idle tale, and as 
many lies and compliments as he could string 
together. Whilst old Catharine was thus falling 
into the snares laid for her by the cunning 
variety a knock upon the door summoned her 
to it, and she returned saying, that a person 
who seemed a good deal fluttered and hurried, 
and did not look like a varlet, wanted to give 
a letter to her young mistress into her own 
hands. 

^^ Which you, of course, will deliver yourself, 
dame," said Jaques (who had no mind his master 
should be abruptly disturbed by the presence of 
a stranger) ; " you will not let this person inter- 
rupt your mistress whilst she is receiving the 
message from her aunt ; such a thing your good 
sense and discretion will not admit." 

'• Certainly not," replied old Catharine ; 
" and so I will insist upon the letter being 
given up to me." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 101 

^' And as my legs are rather younger than 
yours," said Jaques, '^ I will save you the 
trouble, dame^ of carrying it up to your mistress, 
and in the meantime you had better mull 
another cup of wine, and think what reward it 
would be proper for such a sensible^ discreet 
person as yourself to expect for the trouble we 
have given you this evening." 

The last hint effectually upset whatever small 
portion of common sense old Catharine might 
retain ; it was all lost in the speculation of an 
unlooked-for gratuity; and having obtained the 
letter from the stranger^ Jaques bounded up to 
his master, gave in the paper for mistress 
Anna, and conjured Henry de Cassel to lose no 
time, but to leave the house immediately. Henry 
promised to depart in a few^ minutes ; Jaques 
returned to taste the other cup with the house- 
keeper ; and no sooner was he gone than Anna 
opened the letter. She read the contents in 
the utmost agitation, and exclaimed, '* Gracious 
Heaven ! what can this mean ?" 

" Speak," said Henry ; " I cannot bear to see 
you thus alarmed ; what is in that paper ?" 
H 3 



102 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" My father^" replied Anna, 
to bid me throw on my mantle, and conceal 
myself as well as I can ; to ask no questions, 
but to follow the bearer of this letter, who will 
bring me directly to him, as he must see me on 
an affair of import, but cannot come to me him- 
self. What can this mean ?" 

Henry de Cassel was alarmed at such an 
extraordinary message ; but it must be supposed 
was as much surprised and as ignorant as Anna 
herself could be, as to the meaning of John 
Lyon's order. His daughter, astonished and 
alarmed, yet fearing she knew not what, hastened 
to obey her father's commands, slipt on her 
mantle, drew the hood over her face, bid a 
hasty adieu to Henry, and followed the stranger 
as she was directed from the house. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 103 



CHAP. V. 

\Ve must now return to John Lyon, who, we 
before noticed, had managed to steal out of the 
inn without interruption, after the fatal fray ; 
and by so doing had escaped the immediate 
wrath of Gilbert Matthew, and a share of that 
imprisonment which had fallen to the lot of the 
good-natured and important little burgomaster, 
Sir Simon de Bete. 

Under cover of the evening, which every 
moment darkened more and more each sur- 
rounding object^ John Lyon pursued his way 
without observation through many of the intri- 
cate windings of the city. These were well 
known to him ; and crossing several canals, he 
at length diverged towards an ancient Gothic 
house, which stood insulated, although within 
the walls of the town. This house, surrounded 
by a small garden, was so watered with canals 
on either side that swept nearly round it, that 
h4 



104 THE WHITE HOODS. 

it seemed peculiarly sequestered, notwithstanding 
the precincts of a commercial town. 

John crossed a little drawbridge leading 
towards the entrance of the mansion, and 
knocked, but not loudly^ upon a huge pair of 
folding gates, which opened into an inner court. 
The knock was answered by an ancient domestic, 
who, with much apparent caution^ let fall the 
bars of a wicket within the great gates, and 
admitted John Lyon, who was well known to 
the varlet thus acting as porter. Whilst this 
passed, both John Lyon and the domestic ob- 
served a profound silence, excepting when the 
former had just mentioned his name in a low 
voice ; nor did either party break this silence 
till the wicket was again secured. It was then 
John ventured to ask in an earnest manner, 
*^ If Peter du Bois might be seen ?" 

" Aye," said the domestic, " and he has 
expected you for more than an hour ; it is 
well you are here, or he would, I doubt not, 
have sallied out to meet you. But stay, we will 
not enter the house by the door of the hall ; 
come round the back way ; some persons are 



THE WHITE HOODS. 105 

with him now ; and perhaps,'* added the varlet, 
in a lower voice^ ^' you might wish to see him 
first in private." 

"It is absolutely necessary that I should do 
so," answered John Lyon, " and I must see him 
instantly." 

'^ 1 will manage it," replied his conductor, 
with a most intelligent look. " He knows the 
sign ; he will understand that you are here 
without a word being spoken. Step into this 
room ; I will leave you the lamp ; here you may 
abide his coming." 

So saying, the varlet threw open a door, and 
ushered John Lyon into a room panelled with 
oak, so dark from age, that the lamp, which 
spread its long beams through the apartment, 
failed to dissipate the darkness, and nothing 
could be distinctly seen excepting a glittering 
towards the extremity of the chamber^ which 
seemed to be a reflected light from some polished 
substances, as they caught the streaming rays of 
the lamp. 

When the domestic retired, and closed the 
door, John Lyon, as he looked around upon the 



106 THE WHITE HOODS. 

dismal aspect of the place, could not help fancy- 
ing it was but an emblem of his own fate, an 
emblem of that dungeon to which he knew all 
the energies of the Matthews would now be 
exerted to consign him. Whilst he was busied 
in these melancholy thoughts — now pondering 
on the best means to secure his acquittal, his 
escape, or his safety, and again rejecting every 
plan as hopeless, which presented itself to his 
imagination, the door opened, and a young man 
entered the room, whose features bore a strong 
resemblance to those of John Lyon, but the 
character of the countenance had more of 
boldness, had a quicker glance of the eye, and 
more energy of expression. There was, too, a 
tincture of sarcasm which shewed itself in the 
play of the mouth, and an undefined something 
in the whole countenance, calculated to raise 
fear in a timid mind. 

" You are here, then, at last," said the young 
man ; " I have anxiously expected you, but are 
you alone — quite alone ? have you failed ? I 
had hoped you would have brought " 

" Do not speak of that now," replied John 



THE WHITE HOODS. lOl* 

Lyon ; '' I have other and more important bu- 
siness." 

'^ Other business you may have, uncle," said 
the young man, '- but more important you 
cannot have. But you look strangely moved, 
and there is much disorder about you. Your 
mantle is rent, and your cheek is bloody : what 
has happened ?" 

" Murder," answered John Lyon, and he 
struck his hand upon his forehead with the most 
hurried action as he uttered the word. 

'' Thank God for it," said the nephew ; 
" then there is a hope that we must begin to act 
as well as to threaten ; but tell me what murder ? 
Whose blood has been the hansel of your steel ? 
Oh, may it soon run in such a deluge through 
this miserable city, that our canals may need no 
other element but the life-blood that has issued 
from the carcases that float upon the surface ! 
Who have you struck with that good hand ?" 

" No one, Peter du Bois," said his uncle. 

" No one ! Did you not speak but now of 
murder ?" 

" I did," answered John Lyon ; " and my life 



108 THE WHITE HOODS. 

is at this moment in the utmost peril of the law ; 
you must conceal me as well as you possibly 
can, till I can either find a means of escape or 
some way to settle this matter ; I " 

^« Escape !" exclaimed Peter du Bois, 
" Escape ! you leave us, uncle, and at such a 
time ! at such a crisis ! no^ never, it would be 
the ruin of our plans. Philip Von Artaveld is 
not yet won over to join the enterprize, and if 
you fail us before it is ripe, all goes to ruin. No, 
I would rather throw open my gates to give you 
up to the law, than shelter you only till you 
could abandon our cause." 

*^ You are hot and rash, nephew," said John 
Lyon. ^' Hear me tell my tale, and then judge for 
me; you shall know all." 

Peter du Bois betrayed considerable impa- 
tience, but the request was obviously too reason- 
able to bear denial ; he listened, therefore, with 
much effort, till John Lyon had completed the 
narration of the events of the evening, and their 
fatal termination in the death of Peter Matthew. 
When he had concluded, his nephew seemed 
greatly vexed and embarrassed, but did not ex- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 109 

press one sympathising feeling for the present 
danger which threatened his uncle from such an 
oifence to the law. Du Bois paced the room 
impatiently, and at length threw himself into a 
chair, when he spoke in such a manner that it 
would be difficult to say, if his discourse was 
principally addressed to his uncle or to himself. 

'-'- This is, indeed, most unfortunate," said 
Peter. " At a time when we needed the most 
active stir, you dare not shew your head abroad. 
Philip Von Artaveld must be won; and that 
old fool, too, that Sir Simon, we wanted him, 
for he has gold — stores of lusty ingots I would 
we could melt his fat sides into broad pieces — 
and he is a prisoner ? Gold we must have ; we 
are not yet ripe for action ; and to move before 
all our engines are ready, would but break our 
machinery piece-meal, for want of combination ; 
their powers act not alone, each is the adjunct to 
the other. What can be done? We must 
delay our measures yet." 

Here Peter du Bois paused, stood with his 
head reclined, and his hand pressed upon his 
forehead, and then starting in a moment, as if at 



110 THE WHITE HOODS. 

once awakened from his reverie by a shock of 
electric force, he suddenly exclaimed, *' I have 
it, I have it ; this very fray of yours, though it 
delay our purpose in the onset, shall yet but 
strengthen our cause, — it shall help to stir up the 
sluggish citizens. Hear me, uncle, you must be 
free, you must be safe, happen what may ; for 
the pilots will not rise without their old deacon 
to head them. And as for this Sir Simon, this 
golden calf, who has just wisdom enough to 
know that his worship lies in the value of his 
metal, let him rest in the EarPs prisons, if he be 
there; not an effort must be made, not a thing 
attempted to release him. I will make his deten- 
tion a fire-brand to light up the embers of wrath 
in those formal old citizens of Ghent, by beating 
it into their brains, that to detain one of their 
burgomasters in prison is a breach of their fran- 
chises, since no magistrate can be committed but 
by the warrant of his fellows. They will be apt 
enough to stir at this ; they shall go so far, that 
they shall quarrel with the Earl, and so for their 
own safety join with us, from the very fear of 
what they have already done. But for you. 



THE WHITE HOODS. Ill 

uncle, I repeat it, you must be free — safe, too, 
by the Earl's pardon ; this will lull him into secu- 
rity, he will have no suspicion ; for all depends 
upon our first measures, that they may find the 
Earl unprepared. You and Lewis de Male were 
good friends once ; you must be so again." 

*^ It is impossible," said John Lyon ; " you 
know too well the cause that first estranged me 
from the Earl's affections. And Gilbert Matthew 
but seized an opportunity^ so favourable to his 
purposes, to work the ruin that has fallen upon 
me." 

" I know it all," replied Peter ; '^ and you 
would repair that ruin from the fragments of the 
great wreck of the Eai'Ps tyrannic government — 
it shall be so, but we must lull him into security ; 
and the very cause which bred that estrangement 
in his regard to you, must now, in some measure 
at least, restore it." 

" What mean you," said John Lyon, with 
considerable agitation; " it cannot be. You 
know my mind ; to what then do you point ?" 

" To your daughter," answered Du Bois, 
calmly. 



112 THE WHITE HOODS. 

'^ My daughter !" exclaimed John Lyon, as 
his eye flashed with an angry glance upon his 
nephew. " My daughter's fame stands fair and 
unpolluted as her own innocent nature, and it 
shall never suffer dishonour for me, or for our 
cause." 

«f It shall not, uncle, whilst I wear a sword," 
replied Peter ; ^' but yet, methinks, in a cause like 
ours, some temporizing, some expediency, were 
no dishonour." 

^' Hear me, nephew," said John Lyon, in a 
firm and authoritative tone. " No man in 
Ghent has been so deeply injured by the Earl as 
I have. I am sworn to revenge my own wrongs ; 
I am devoted to the public cause. To restore 
our violated rights, our broken franchises, I will 
peril my life, all I have, to aid you ; but my 
child shall not share the general ruin, if ruin 
should fall upon us." 

" You cannot save her, whether it does or 
not," replied Peter ; '' think you if our plots are 
discovered, if our enterprize fails, that when our 
heads blacken in the sun, whilst they stand to 
feed the birds of the air, perched on these old 



THE WHITE HOODS. 113 

city walls ; thinkest thou that any man would 
then dare to step forward to protect thy pretty 
Anna, the daughter of a rebel, from the power 
of the Earl ? her safety rests with our success." 

" It does, indeed," said John Lyon, mourn- 
fully. '' What is it you would have me do? 
yet speak not of my daughter ; I cannot again 
place her within the gaze of a prince, whose 
lawless passion may be fatal to her." 

" You were not always thus prudent, uncle," 
said Peter, with a sarcastic smile : '^ there was a 
time when the love of Lewis de Male, the merry, 
widowed Earl of Flanders, seemed no such fatal 
passion in your eyes. When it chose for its 
object the daughter of Lewis's favourite, a simple 
burgher of Ghent, my pretty cousin Anna was 
then allowed to amuse the leisure of a prince." 

John Lyon received this sarcastic speech of 
his nephew with a look of stern resentment. 
'^ What," he exclaimed, " to me ! is it to me 
you speak thus insolently ? But you are safe, 
for I am in your power, and thus you abuse it. 
Hear me then, and learn more than I have yet 
imparted to you or any one. To crush at once 

VOL, I. 1 



114 THE WHITE HOODS. 

this bold suspicion of my honour, I will tell you 
more than you have dared even to think. I 
knew of the Earl's suit to my daughter — I en- 
couraged it — I gave it growth and opportunity ; 
but not, as you would insinuate, to make her the 
wanton of a prince. The Earl would have mar- 
ried Anna, but " 

^« Oh, would that he had married her," ex- 
claimed Peter du Bois; '' all Flanders would 
have openly murmured, and perhaps rebelled. 
France would have shaken off her disgraced 
vassal Earl, and the rule of Ghent, long ere this, 
had been modelled after our own will. But how 
came the Earl to lose the honour of becoming 
son-in-law to the deacon of his pilots." 

Again John Lyon frowned resentfully at the 
sarcastic insolence of his nephew, as he replied, 
" The Countess of Artois, his despotic mother, 
who rules the Earl as if he were still fettered by 
his leading-strings, she discovered the affair, and 
I suspect by the means of Gilbert Matthew. She 
acted her usual part, ruled the prince by her 
authority, and made her factions threaten him 
with a breach with France, and declared she 
4. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 115 

would disinherit him as her heir in Artois if he 
persisted. Thus was he wrought upon to change 
his purpose, and from an honourable became a 
lawless suitor to my daughter. Induced, there- 
fore, by my own feelings to preserve her inno- 
cence, and urged by the entreaties of my child, 
I withdrew her from the court, and have since 
kept her almost a prisoner within my own house 
in Ghent. Anna never loved the Earl, even 
when I hoped to place a coronet upon her brows ; 
but fear for my life prevented her rejecting his 
suit, whilst it was honourable." 

" And fear for your life must now make her 
obtain your pardon from the Earl: she must 
solicit him," said Du Bois; " and this will give 
you present safety, and afford us time for action 
Send for your daughter on the instant." 

" No," replied John Lyon, " I have solemnly 
sworn to redress my own wrongs by the fall of 
Lewis de Male, to revenge the affront he cast 
upon my honour, in his lawless pursuit of my 
child; and I will neither owe my life to his 
mercy, nor shall Anna do an act disgraceful to 
us both." 

I 2 



116 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" If such are your resolves," said Du Bois, 
" then hear mine. I will not shelter you, to 
bring upon us all the fury of Gilbert Matthew's 
vengeance, till we are ready to meet it ; nor will 
I tamely yield my own neck to the headsman or 
to the hangman; I will make one desperate 
effort. In our present circumstances it is most 
likely to fail, but at least we shall die bravely, 
sword in hand ; and when we are gone, Anna is 
left unprotected to the mercy of the gay Earl, 
who will spare a pretty wench, though the 
daughter of a rebel, for the sake of her blue eyes 
and lily cheeks." 

Du Bois followed up this speech with the most 
artful arguments, to induce his uncle to allow 
Anna to solicit the Earl for his pardon, and to 
appear for a time to countenance Lewis's lawless 
suit. John Lyon, whilst his nephew thus ad- 
dressed him, paced the room in a state of the 
greatest agitation, till overpowered by arguments 
he could neither find resolution nor courage to 
resist, he complied with the proposal, and wrote 
the letter before mentioned to summon his 
daughter's attendance, which Peter du Bois 



THE WHITE HOODS. 11*7 

forwarded immediately by one of his own 
people. 

The reader is already aware, that upon re- 
ceiving the letter Anna hastened to obey her 
father's commands. She followed the messenger 
with a palpitating heart — her anxious mind 
tortured by a thousand vague apprehensions for 
her father's safety^ yet without knowing what she 
had to fear, for John Lyon had never, even indi- 
rectly, communicated to his daughter the despe- 
rate schemes in which he had for some time been 
engaged, and with men as desperate. Still, 
Anna was not ignorant of the enmity which 
subsisted between her father and the Matthews, 
and that the loss of his lucrative station, as deacon 
of the pilots, had been brought about by their 
intrigues. She had also remarked her father's 
silent and abstracted manner when with herself, 
his frequent absence from home at extraordinary 
hours, sometimes during half the night ; that his 
nephew Peter du Bois was often closeted with 
him ; and that now and then some strange and 
ruffian-looking fellow came and went as a mes- 
senger between them. Anna had once or twice 
i 8 



118 THE WHITE HOODS. 

ventured to notice these circumstances to her 
father, but the severe manner in which he chid 
her for observing in him what he would gladly 
conceal — the mystery of his character — had 
effectually silenced all farther enquiries. 

It may well be supposed that her mind now 
reverted to these things, and that she could not 
help connecting them with the present summons 
she had received, and an alarm for her parent's 
safety. But, obedient to his directions, she for- 
bore to make any enquiry of her guide, who con- 
ducted her, by many windings and bye streets^ in 
silence, with the utmost caution, to the house of 
Peter du Bois; of which, in addition to what has 
been already said, it may be noticed, that it was 
an ancient and solitary mansion, which had for 
many years stood neglected and empty for want 
of repair, but which Peter, since the commence- 
ment of his desperate plans, had thought proper 
to occupy, for the purpose of carrying on his 
schemes as remote as he possibly could from 
public observation. The house, too, afforded 
many chances for security in case of a pursuit, 
since there was in it more than one secret pas- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 119 

sage and chamber ; for it had been built at a time 
when Flanders was disturbed by civil strife, and 
was thus constructed for the security of personal 
property. 

When Anna followed the guide into the inner 
courts and heard the falhng of the heavy iron 
bars to secure the door after their entrance, an 
involuntary shudder came over her whole frame ; 
she could not help thinking that the door had 
closed upon her with an evil portent, and that 
she was now within the vortex of some dreadful 
current, whose force she should be unable to 
resist. Her fears, perhaps, were not the less, 
because they had no defined cause: for her 
imagination, at all times vivid, raised up at this 
moment a thousand terrible images to connect 
them with her own or her father's fate. 

On being conducted to the chamber before 
noticed^ Anna gave a faint shriek as she entered, 
for the first object that met her view was her 
father, sitting in a chair by the table; the lamp 
stood on it, the light streamed full upon his 
face, and shewed it pale, haggard, and marked 
with blood, his dress soiled and disordered^ and 
1 4 



120 THE WHITE HOODS. 

his mantle, that had been rent in the fray, hang- 
ing tattered upon his shoulders, whilst Peter du 
Bois looked flushed with angry passions, which 
seemed to have been excited by the vehemence 
of his discourse. 

Anna, pale, trembling, and almost sinking 
with apprehension, rushed towards John Lyon, 
and exclaimed, " Holy Virgin ! what has hap- 
pened. Oh ! are you hurt, my father ? my dear 
father !" Unable to add another word, she burst 
into tears, and sunk nearly lifeless into his arms. 
It was some time before Anna was sufficiently 
composed to know that her father was really not 
materially hurt, and that the blood upon his 
cheek was solely occasioned by the skin having 
been torn in a fray. 

Peter du Bois resolved to strike whilst the 
iron was hot : he witnessed the tender feelings, 
and the agitation of Anna ; he saw this was the 
proper moment to work upon her mind, and to 
induce her to consent to solicit the Earl for her 
father's life, when she had recently been so 
seriously alarmed for its preservation. Peter 
therefore conjured his cousin to compose her- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 121 

self, and to hear the tale he had to tell, as her 
father's safety, his very life, would depend upon 
herself. Anna needed no other motive to over- 
come her feelings, yet so great was her agitation, 
that she could only beg Peter to speak out, and 
assuring him she was composed, promised atten- 
tion ; but her pale cheek and her trembling 
hands, as she fixed her anxious eyes upon the 
speaker, seemed to contradict the first assertion. 

Peter du Bois then related the whole circum- 
stance of the fray with the Matthews, and its 
fatal consequence, and added, that as there could 
be no doubt Sir Simon de Bete was taken and 
secured, the Matthews would never rest till John 
Lyon should be also a prisoner; and that she 
must herself be aware nothing short of his life 
would satisfy the malice and the vengeance of 
Gilbert. 

Anna, whose sense was as lively as her imagi- 
nation, needed to hear no more. In a moment 
she saw all the real danger which threatened her 
father, and guessed in what manner she was to 
be employed to avert it. Shocked and over- 
come by the dreadful prospect of her father's 



122 THE WHITE HOODS. 

death, or her own ruin, in the agony of her 
feehngs she clasped her hands together with 
fearful energy, looked up, and exclaimed^ " Oh, 
Heaven save and protect me from this most 
dreadful trial ! — yet my father, my poor 
father !" 

At this instant the door of the chamber 
burst open, and the domestic who acted as 
porter rushed in and hastily said, " Save your- 
selves ; do what you can for shelter ; the city 
watch and a strong guard are without the gates ; 
they demand to search the house for John 
Lyon, who is accused of murder, and supposed 
to have taken shelter here." 

The confusion and distress of all present at 
the moment, upon hearing this intelligence, may 
be readily conceived. Anna started up, and 
clasping Peter du Bois by the arm, she said, 
distractedly, " Oh, save him ! save him ! Is 
there no way to save him ? I will do all you 
wish — I will do any thing, only save my 
father." 

" I can, I will save him," replied Du Bois ; 
'* follow me on the instant, but as you value 



THE WHITE HOODS. 123 

your father's life, be silent. I must take you 
where you will find some things that may sur- 
prise and shock a woman. Beware then. Utter 
but one word, one cry, and your father's body, 
ere to morrow morning, will hang upon the 
provost's tree, to feed the ravens. Follow in 
silence — not a moment is to be lost. Here, 
fellow," he added, turning to the domestic, 
'• take up the lamp, and lead the way ; you 
know what to do. John Lyon support your 
daughter ; let her draw her mantle about her 
head ; we must to the council chamber." 

" Must my daughter go there ?" said John. 
" I will follow you. Let her abide here ; the 
ofl&cers of justice will not harm her." 

" What !" exclaimed Du Bois, ^' leave her 
to ruin us all ! No ; if they find the young 
bird, they will know well enough the old one 
lies near the bush. Happen what may, she 
must descend with us. Have no fears, my pretty 
cousin, only be silent. Your father's life, your 
own, is at stake ; for I must take you where 
there are those whose poignards follow the 



124 THE WHITE HOODS. 

slightest cause of suspicion. And mark me, 
whatever you may see or hear, it must find its 
grave in your bosom: remember your father's 
life." 

" Say no more, say no more," cried Anna, 
eagerly; " I will follow as patient as the victim 
to the altar, only save him ; but oh^ let us hasten_, 
I heard a noise ; surely they strike upon the 
gates." 

'^ They do, indeed," said Du Bois; " hasten, 
or we are lost." So saying, he hastily led the 
way down a flight of dark stone stairs into a 
lower and ruinous apartment. Partly filled with 
billets of wood, straw, and empty casks, it 
seemed as if this place was only used as a recep- 
tacle for rubbish. 

" Be quick," said Peter to the servant ; " re- 
move that pile of wood, and fail not to replace 
it the moment we have descended ; then leave 
open the door of this chamber, that there may 
be no appearance of concealment ; and do you 
hasten back, and conduct the officers into every 
place in the house and garden. If they ask for 



THE WHITE HOODS. 125 

me^ say I am not yet returned from Bruges. 
So, now descend ; give me the lamp. Your 
hand, my cousin ; I will lead you down." 

Whilst Peter had been speaking, the servant 
had removed the wood, and raised a trap-door 
it had concealed; this door opened upon what 
now appeared a dark pit or gulph below ; but 
when Du Bois held up the lamp as he descended 
a few steps, the trembling Anna saw that they 
had a flight of winding stairs yet to descend. 
She gave her hand to Peter^ and summoning all 
her fortitude to her aid, followed in silence. 
John Lyon remained a moment behind them, 
and closed the trap-door after him ; Anna re- 
marked this, and thought it was a proof he must 
be familiar with its secret spring. She heard 
the servant replace the wood upon it above, and 
then his retiring footsteps died away in silence. 

" Stalpert is a churl," said Du Bois, softly^ 
" but he is tried, cunning, and faithful ; he will 
manage well enough with the officers ; yet follow 
me, we are nearly descended." Anna again 
gave him her hand, for she had quitted her hold 
for a moment to look back at her father. Du 



126 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Bois at length led her through a narrow passage, 
which was terminated by a door. Here Peter 
stopt a moment ; he raised the lamp, so as 
to let its light fall upon the countenance of 
Anna. 

" You are very pale^ my pretty cousin," he 
said, looking stedfastly upon her ; " draw your 
mantle closer ; now, now is your moment of 
trial ; take your father's arm ; enter by yonder 
door when I shall bid you ; but remember that 
a word of fear, but one word of distrust, doubt, 
or even of curiosity, may cost you life. Stay 
here for a few minutes ; I must go in first to 
prepare " 

" No, Du Bois," said John Lyon, " let her 
not enter that chamber. I will go with you ; 
let us leave my child here." 

'« I dare not do it," replied Peter; " should it 
be known that I brought any one so near them, 
and conceal it too, that person would not be 
suffered to leave this place alive ; she must pass 
in with you, but I will prepare them, never 
fear." 

So saying, Du Bois gave the lamp to his 



THE WHITE HOODS. 127 

uncle, passed on to the extremity of the passage, 
and opened the door ; he entered, and instantly 
closed it. Anna heard a confused murmur of 
voices from within the chamber ; but after Peter's 
entrance the murmur decreased, and at length 
there was a total silence. John Lyon, during 
this interval, seemed wholly abstracted ; he 
looked upon his daughter with a countenance 
in which a calm, fixed, and serious purpose ap- 
peared depicted, but he spoke not. At length 
his nephew returned, and made a sign to them, 
with his hand, to follow him into the adjoining 
chamber. 



128 THE WHITE HOODS. 



CHAP- VI. 

During the late scene, Anna felt convinced 
that her father was engaged in some mysterious, 
and, she feared, dreadful enterprise, of which 
she had hitherto been kept in ignorance. She 
now thought that it might be quite as dangerous 
to him^ perhaps, as the consequences of the late 
fi-ay, which had involved him in a charge of 
murder. She summoned, therefore, all her 
resolution of mind to her aid. Her own inno- 
cence gave her some degree of courage ; and, 
conscious that a desire to save her father, if pos- 
sible, from the perils that surrounded him, must 
be an acceptable motive in the eye of Heaven, 
she determined to observe whatever might pass, 
to obey the injunctions laid upon her, neither 
to betray fear nor curiosity, and hoped, by so 
doing, to obtain a more complete knowledge of 
these dark proceedings, with the view that she 
might ultimately prove of service to her parent. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 129 

It was fortunate for Anna that she had pos- 
sessed this interval of time, which, by a few 
minutes reflection, enabled her to form these 
resolutions before she followed Peter du Bois 
into the chamber of midnight council ; otherwise 
her courage might have forsaken her, in the 
feelings of astonishment and dismay that filled 
her whole heart, upon the first view of the in- 
mates of the chamber. 

The apartment she now entered was a low 
vaulted room, built entirely of stone_, with walls 
of massive thickness ; the door was of iron, with 
bars and chains to secure it, for the place had 
once been used to conceal both persons and 
treasure, during the dangers of a civil war. A 
long oak table stood in the midst, surrounded by 
a bench and some old chairs. From the centre 
of the groined arch of the ceiling hung an iron 
lamp, which flamed high, and threw a red glare 
upon every thing around. 

When Peter du Bois entered with John Lyon 
and his daughter, the most profound silence 
reigned amongst the inmates of this subterranean 
chamber, for no one dared speak whilst the 

VOL. I. K 



130 THE WHITE HOODS. 

officers of justice were known to be searching 
the house above, lest the least sound should 
betray this place of refuge and security. Anna 
cast a hurried and a terrified glance around, and 
as if overpowered by the fearful objects that met 
her eyes, she closed them for a moment, and 
sunk her head upon the arm of her father. 
Indeed such a groupe, and so assembled, had 
never before presented itself to a young woman, 
whose early life had been passed in rural re- 
tirement, and latterly within the precincts of a 
court, and in the midst of an opulent city. 

At the head of the oak table, there was seated 
a man, whose aspect seemed stamped with the 
image of his mind ; he looked fit for rapine or for 
murder. A meagre figure, dressed in blacky sat 
next to him, whose bones seemed starting through 
a dry and shrivelled skin, the living repre- 
sentative of poverty and famine. Others there 
were of bold, hardy, and ferocious countenances. 
Two or three, even in this abyss of concealment, 
sat muffled in cloaks, as if fearful of the glance 
of their very companions. Some, by the wretched 
and negligent state of their apparel, looked 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 131 

beggared in fortune ; but all were armed with 
more than one weapon, which, since the late 
alarm^ communicated by Du Bois, many had 
unsheathed, as if prepared for defence. Upon 
the table lay several papers ; and amongst the 
party was seen a monk, who, it appeared^ by 
the inkhorn and pens that stood before him, 
acted the part of secretary to the council. 

" Good God !" thought Anna, as she once 
more raised her head, and stole another fearful 
glance around her, '* Can my father be the 
associate of wretches like these ? a monk too ! 
Oh, can religion mingle itself with men who 
look like midnight assassins." 

In the stern and ruffian aspect of each man 
assembled round the table, a deep and attentive 
anxiety was depicted — no one spoke — no one 
moved ; their very respiration seemed as much 
as possible subdued; but silence added yet a 
greater horror to the scene, since it left but 
leisure for the imagination to fill up the void, 
with that voice which is never stronger than 
when it speaks to the mind in moments of fear. 
John Lyon and his daughter still kept their 
k2 



132 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Station by the door, and Peter du Bois was 
near them, now looking upon the assembly^ and 
now at Anna, with a mixture of doubt and ap- 
prehension. Anna thought he might fear that 
she had forgotten his injunctions, and in order 
to re-assure him, she stood as erect and firm as 
her trembling frame would let her. 

This profound silence continued for more 
than half an hour, during which, even in this 
dark recess, the sounds and noise of persons 
passing above, as in tumult, could be distinctly 
heard. At length they gradually died away, 
and all again was stillness, yet no one spoke : 
all was hushed and calm; but to the terrified 
imagination of Anna, it seemed only like that 
deep, dead stillness, which sometimes precedes 
the coming storm, and is at length broken by 
the low and distant thunder, gathering force as 
it rolls nearer and nearer onward, till it bursts 
at once with all its accumulated fury. And so 
was it now ; for no sooner had a shrill whistle 
from above met the ears of the assembly below, 
(as the signal from the trusty Stalpert that the 
officers had departed, and all was safe,) than 



THE WHITE HOODS. 133 

instantly they burst out into tumultuous excla- 
mations of anger and resentment against Peter 
du Bois. 

" How is this," said the ruffian who occupied 
the head of the table ; ^' is this your accursed 
policy, to bring a woman amongst us, to carry 
all our heads to the provost marshal by one 
slip of her tongue ? You have betrayed us, Du 
Bois !" 

Peter advanced to speak^ when John Lyon, 
in a manner peculiarly authoritative, stept for- 
ward, and thus addressed the assembly : " No, 
my friends, Du Bois has not betrayed you ; nor 
are you in any danger from the presence of this 
simple maiden. Du Bois, I conclude, has told 
you all of my peril ; I was pursued. Had the 
officers of justice found my daughter, the child 
of your persecuted leader, in this house, be sure 
of it, the discovery of you all would have fol- 
lowed as the certain consequence; to satisfy 
their own suspicion, that I lurked near her, 
they would have left a strong guard in this 
place. There was no way but to bring her to 
this chamber. To save you, and not to betray 
K 3 



]34 THE WHITE HOODS. 

you, she is here, and now the signal is given, 
she shall retire, and intrude no longer." 

" The fiends of hell shall hold her first," ex- 
claimed the man who had before spoken, " ere 
she goes from this place to tell what she has 
seen in it. No, no, John Lyon, we will trust 
you^ but no prating wench, though she be your 
daughter." 

" Friends," replied John Lyon, willing to 
conciliate the murmuring assembly, " Friends, 
1 will answer for my daughter's silence with my 
own life. I solemnly pledge you my word, that 
she knows nothing of your councils, nor of mine ; 
take heed, then, that you do not betray them 
yourselves — let the maiden pass." 

" She shall not pass," said the ruffian ; " by 
all the saints of heaven, or devils in hell, I 
swear she shall not go hence to betray us. You 
have brought her here, and here she shall re- 
main, till we are in action and secure." 

" No, no, she shall not pass," exclaimed a 
young man of the council ; ^' we will have no 
woman to spoil our work, with a curious eye 
and a busy tongue ; you pass not out, young 



THE WHITE HOODS. 135 

mistress, excepting through my dagger's point.'* 
And with these words he placed himself between 
Anna and the door, and so violently seized her 
by the arm, that her mantle fell back in the 
struggle, and exhibited her pale^ affrighted, but 
beautiful countenance^ to the assembly. " She 
is a fair wench, this daughter of thine, John/' 
continued the young man, who had placed 
himself as guard over the door ; '^ and if she is 
to be a prisoner in this chamber, I will even 
take the ward of her myself." 

" Wretch !" exclaimed John Lyon, as he 
suddenly removed Anna from her detainer's 
grasp, " unhand my child, — she is no mate for 
thee; and either give her present liberty, or I 
renounce you and your cause for ever : be the 
peril on your own head." 

The young man, to whom this speech was 
addressed, answered it by a scornful laugh, 
" Why, what canst thou do, John Lyon," he 
said ; " desert us if thou wilt, aye, go raise the 
town, and yell of treason and traitors in the 
very ears of Lewis himself — he will but grant 
thee a precedency in hanging, if we but thrust 
k4 



136 THE WHITE HOODS. 

thee out of these doors. I say it, and I swear 
it^ thy girl is as pretty a wench as ever man 
need have to console him in such a dungeon as 
this cursed damp vault ; she shall abide in it, 
and in my keeping." 

At these words^ John Lyon lost his temper, 
and endeavoured to assail with violence the in- 
solent conspirator ; he was prevented by the 
interference of Peter du Bois. The confvision now 
became general ; Anna faintly implored for pity 
and mercy, and promised silence ; Du Bois tried 
to pacify his uncle ; all spoke, and no one listened, 
till the aged wretch, who looked like the image 
of death just started from the grave, arose from 
his seat, stretched forth his bony hand, and ex- 
claimed, in a voice whose shrill tones startled 
the ear upon which they grated, " Hear me ! 
hear me !" The assembly looked towards him. 
" Hear me !" repeated the living spectre. " Let 
John Lyon give in a thousand pieces of gold; 
let him add to it that circle of pearls that binds 
the maiden's locks, and what golden trinkets 
may be about her ; make her swear upon the 
cross, the most blessed cross, to be secret, and 



THE WHITE HOODS. 137 

let her go hence. Gold, pearls^ and oaths made 
on sacred things, are of more secm*ity than her 
father's promises, and we shall be rid of the 
charge of keeping and maintaining a damsel, 
who looks too frightened to tell tales." 

" Oh, take all I have," said Anna: " take, 
take the pearls, the gold^ anything, so you but 
let me go." 

" Open the door," exclaimed John Lyon; 
" give us passage, or by the living God I 
swear, that the first man who opposes, shall 
taste the temper of this steel ;" he drew forth a 
dagger as he spoke; " my daughter shall give 
nothing ; my word is pledged for her silence ; 
who dares doubt it; do you, Arnoul le Clerc, 
or you. La Nuitee ?" 

The conspirators looked for a moment at each 
other, as if overawed by the authoritative tone 
and manner of their leader. John Lyon now 
stood near the door, supporting his almost 
fainting child upon one arm, and holding in the 
other his brandished dagger : no one had a mind 
to be the first person to try its temper ; and John 
was known to be of a determined purpose. There 



138 THE WHITE HOODS. 

was a momentary silence. The monk now ad- 
vanced— '* John Lyon," he said, " hear me; I 
would speak with you and yonder maiden apart 
from the rest ; my holy calling may command 
some respect." 

" Thy holy calling !" said the young man, 
Arnoul le Clerc^ " aye, who would doubt it? 
thou art to lead stray souls to thy master's house, 
and most of them will find their way through a road 
fiery enough, if they follow thee. But no women 
and priests caballing together; so, master secre- 
tary of the cowl and petticoat, stand back, and 
let all the assembly hear what you have to say." 

The monk darted an angry glance upon Ar- 
noul le Clerc, but did not reply to him. '' I 
know something of this maiden," he said; " I 
have often seen her at the mass ; she is devout 
and fervent in her prayers ; I know how to 
secure her silence; there shall be no need of 
threats. Here, damsel," he continued, turning 
to Anna, " swear upon this cross, (and your 
own father's life be the bond of your fidelity,) 
swear, that what you have this night seen or 
heard within this chamber, shall never pass 



THE WHITE HOODS. 139 

your lips to mortal creature ; swear by the Bles- 
sed Virgin ; kiss the cross." 

" Swear, swear," repeated Du Bois eagerly 
to Anna, in a low voice ; " swear a dozen oaths 
if necessary, and we are safe, at the price of a 
litde breath." 

Anna involuntarily shuddered at the idea, that 
she was thus to become sworn to keep secret the 
meetings of such a band of lawless ruffians ; but 
overcome with fear, and scarcely capable of 
utterance, she cast a timid look upon her father 
— that look sufficed, " Yes," she thought, '' if 
I am free, I may yet save him;" and eagerly 
kissing the cross that was extended to her, she 
repeated almost unconsciously the oath enjoined 
her by the monk, word for word, as he dictated. 

John Lyon and his daughter were then allowed 
to withdraw. Peter du Bois conducted them 
back to the chamber, bade Stalpert make such 
preparations as he could to accommodate them 
for the night, and hastened back to the council, 
which, he said, he must again attend ere they 
broke up, and that he would make John Lyon's 
final peace with the assembly. 



140 THE WHITE HOODS. 

No sooner was he gone than Anna threw her- 
self before her father's feet, clasped his knees 
and sobbed aloud, and then raising her eyes 
towards him, with outstretched hands^ she con- 
jured him, in the tenderest and most emphatic 
manner, to quit the dangerous, the dreadful 
society of those profligate and wretched men. 

^' Anna," said her father, '« I cannot speak of 
them to you : remember your oath. They are 
not what you think them. Although not fitting 
for the company of women, they are noble 
spirits, who would wager life for liberty and 
honour." 

" Rather say for rapine and plunder," replied 
Anna. '' Oh, my father, can honour dwell with 
men who would, even but now, turn upon 
(what I shudder to think you called yourself) 
their leader. Of what worth can liberty be to 
those, who would use it but to curse and brawl 
amongst themselves ? Oh, my father, I would 
peril my life if it could aid you. Let us leave 
all we have — let us fly together from this miser- 
able city. I can work for you ; nay, I am not 
too proud, I could beg for you, so we were 



THE WHITE HOODS. 141 

innocent. These hands shall labour for your 
daily bread, so you were safe in soul and body. 
Leave, then, this fatal place; we will fly this 
instant ; let me, let me save you." 

'' You can, you shall save me," said John 
Lyon, who appeared greatly moved by his 
daughter's affectionate and impassioned address. 
" But flight would be madness ; the vengeance 
of Gilbert Matthew will leave no place of safety 
for me ; I should be discovered, imprisoned, and 
led to death. For this night, perhaps, I am 
secure, by the officers having already searched 
the house ; but beyond this night, so help me 
Heaven, I have no hope for one hour's safety, 
unless " 

" What ! my father," exclaimed Anna; 
" speak, oh speak ; do not torture me with this 
suspense." 

John advanced towards his daughter, took 
her hand, and essayed to speak, but suddenly 
casting it from him, he paced the room in con- 
siderable agitation, whilst his downcast looks had 
in them an expression of shame ; he felt abashed, 
even before his own child, at the thoughts of 



142 THE WHITE HOODS. 

what he was about to propose to her. At length 
he made an effort to overcome these last struggles 
of better feeling, and with a look of despair 
strongly imprinted upon every feature, he asked 
Anna " if she would do one act to save him 
from death." 

" One act !" said Anna, " oh, a thousand ; 
name it, but name it^ and if it be only at the 
peril of my life — you gave me life, and it shall 
be spent to save you. I fear nothing. From 
God I received my spirit, and to him I will 
commit it." 

" My child," replied John Lyon, " there is 
but one way, and that I cannot name to you ; 
you will think it dishonour, yet it will not be 

such — not actual dishonour — only . In 

fine, the Earl of Flanders might by your means 
consent — that is, at your solicitation, he might 
be induced to grant me a free pardon, if " 

" If I would yield to his lawless pursuit," 
added Anna. " No, my father ; I can die with 
you, but never, never will I do an act that may 
save your body from peril to lose your immortal 
soul. You shall not give your child to guilt." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 143 

" I will not — I mean it not," eagerly 
answered John Lyon ; " it is only this, Anna, I 
would ask of you, that you would solicit the 
Earl for me — that you would not vehemently 
reject his professions of affection — in short, that 
you would patiently hsten to what Lewis may 
urge in behalf of his suit; for, I fear, on no 
other terms would he grant the pardon." 

" What !" said Anna, " you would have me 
temporise ! appear to encourage a disgraceful 
passion, which my very soul abhors. Oh, my 
father, is it not written in the book of life, that 
man shall do no ill that good may come of it ? 
How then can I practise such deceit ? How can 
I hold out hopes that I may become infamous, 
without the danger of falling into the very snare 
my own guile would spread for another. No — 
this I cannot do. But I will seek the Earl — I 
will boldly throw myself at his feet. For your 
sake, I would humble myself to the dust before 
him. I will beg his mercy for my father, and 
promise him the prayers, the blessing of a poor 
girl, as the only honest guerdon she can give in 
return for a father's life." 



144 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" That would be useless," said John Lyon. 
" I know the Earl ; you shall not solicit him 
only to meet a denial. Farewell, Anna — all is 
over — it is needless to seek farther concealment. 
Farewell for ever. When you shall hear the 
castle bell toll the death note for your father's 
execution, you may be sorry — you may lament, 
perhaps^ that you had wanted but a little patience 
to hear a tale every court gallant repeats to a 
fair maid, and no harm done. It is but so. 
Farewell." 

" Stay, stay. Oh, whither do you go, my 
father ?" cried Anna, distractedly. 

" To yield myself to justice," replied John. 
'^ This, perhaps, may save me from the wheel ; 
an axe is a sharp, but a less painful death." 

" Stay — do not go/' exclaimed Anna; " the 
wheel ! the axe ! Oh, go not — go not ;" and 
her voice sounded loud and shrill from the agony 
she felt, as she rushed forward and hung upon 
her father's mantle. " No," she continued^ " I 
will not spill your bloody I will not be the mur- 
derer of my father. I will do all you wish — yes, 
I will kneel to the Earl, and bid him kill me — 



THE WHITE HOODS. 145 

in pity kill me. I will hear all his love, and save 
yon, save you." 

John Lyon folded his daughter in his arms, 
whilst a tear of parental affection bedewed his 
cheeky and so contradictory are the feelings and 
the wishes of the human mind^ that at this 
moment he almost repented the arts, and the 
terrific arguments, he had used to wring from 
her a compliance to adopt measures for his 
safety, which her own ingenuous character 
abhorred. 

The voice of nature spoke loudly within his 
bosom, but that bosom was too cold, too selfish, 
to yield implicitly to its dictates. John had suc- 
ceeded in his efforts to work on the mind of 
Anna, and he now endeavoured to console him- 
self, and to quiet his own conscience with the 
hope that no ultimate ruin would fall upon his 
daughter. " For, after all," thought he, ^' it is 
but to amuse the Earl with a few hopes for the 
present — my life will be preserved till we are 
ripe for action, and then will I take such a 
revenge on Lewis de Male, that he shall no 
longer rule in Ghent or Flanders, but his life — 

VOL. I. L 



146 THE WHITE HOODS. 

I will endeavour to spare his life when that hour 
comes, if he now grants mine." 

Such were the reflections of John Lyon, as he 
slowly paced the room, for Anna, exhausted by 
the late scenes she had witnessed, and distracted 
with the contest of violent and conflicting feel- 
ings, had sunk into a chair, where she sat like a 
statue of monumental sorrow, so still, so mute, so 
motionless was her whole aspect and demeanor. 
The contest was past — she had resolved to com- 
ply, and a deep feeling of melancholy, which 
accompanied the settled purpose of her mind, 
had now succeeded to the violence of her former 
emotions. 

Peter du Bois at length returned, and Anna, 
who could not bear to converse upoji the purpose 
she was the next day to put in practice, was glad 
to retire to a chamber in the hope to obtain some 
rest. She took leave of her father and of her 
cousin for the night, received the blessing of the 
former, and, retiring, left them to their secret 
councils. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 147 



CHAP. VII. 

When Anna retired to the chamber that had 
been allotted to her in the house of Peter du 
Bois, she threw herself upon her knees, and 
fervently prayed to Heaven to grant her that 
support and protection so necessary for her in 
this most painful time of trouble and distress. 
The fervour of devotion, whilst it animated her 
trust in Providence, and elevated her feelings be- 
yond the anxieties of this terrestrial world, gave 
her courage to undertake, and patience to endure, 
the difficulties with which her situation was sur- 
rounded. She arose from her devotions in a 
calmer and a firmer frame of mind than she had 
yet experienced since the events of the day ; and 
before she retired to her bed, she determined to 
consider in what manner it would be most ad- 
visable to execute her plan of soliciting from the 
Earl of Flanders a pardon for her father. 
She knew well how vehemently Lewis de Male 
l2 



148 THE WHITE HOODS. 

had expressed his affection for her, that but for 
state reasons, he would have married her ; and 
when this became incompatible with the prince, 
he had still pressed his suit as the lover. She also 
knew that her father's having discountenanced 
these lawless addresses was the primary cause 
of the ruin that had fallen upon him, and that 
Gilbert Matthew had only seized upon a favour- 
able opportunity to complete the work. Gilbert 
was the determined enemy both of her father 
and of herself, siqce he, too, was a rejected 
suitor, and she had cause to .believe that he had 
so far poisoned the mind of the haughty Countess 
of Artois, as to make her think that Anna fos- 
tered the passion of the Countess's son Lewis, 
in the hope to use the influence love might give 
her over his feelings, and induce him to marry 
her. This was a suspicion false as it was pain- 
ful. Anna, therefore, was aware that however 
innocently she might now renew a connection 
with the Earl_, merely to solicit her father's par- 
don, that such an act on her part would be 
liable to the most cruel misconstruction, should 
it become known to the Countess of Artois, and 



THE WHITE HOODS. 149 

that Gilbert would rejoice in such an oppor- 
tunity to blacken her fame, and to work her 
ruin. 

The Earl of Flanders, she endeavoured to 
persuade herself, was the person she had the 
least to fear in the court, for although a prince, 
who^ like most princes of his time^ indulged in 
the profligacy of unlawful pleasures, yet she 
knew there was in his character a considerable 
share of chivalrous feeling. So that, notwith- 
standing he had attempted every means to seduce 
her, he had always expressed an ardent desire 
to achieve his purpose by gaining an interest in 
her affections, rather than by any exertion of his 
power ; for scarcely would Lewis have valued 
Anna as his mistress, unless he felt convinced 
love had induced her to submit to the degrada- 
tion of being such. Still she was certain the 
Earl deeply resented her father's interference in 
this unhappy business, and she could neither 
flatter nor deceive her own mind with the expec- 
tation that Lewis would grant a pardon on any 
consideration, unless he was allowed to hope 
for some ultimate success in her afl^ections. 
L 3 



150 THE WHITE HOODS. 

These were melancholy and terrible reflec- 
tions^ for she now remembered that she had 
heard that the Earl was become more profligate 
in his manners, and it was evident, by all that 
had happened, that no lingering feeling of pity 
for herself had checked Lewis's desire to injure 
her father. What, then, could she expect ? — 
And to hold out hopes that the time might come, 
however distant, when she would be induced to 
sanction the Prince's dishonourable passion, was 
an act of deception against which her whole soul 
revolted. 

Yet her father's life, his very life, was at stake ; 
and Anna, too, hoped that should she succeed 
in obtaining this pardon, she might be able to 
withdraw him from an intercourse with those 
wretches, in whose association she was convinced 
there must be danger, guilt, and ruin. This 
last thought operated strongly upon her mind, 
and she resolved, cost what it would to her own 
feelings, that she would attempt all to save him 
from such a vortex of wickedness ; for, however 
ignorant Anna might be of the world, she had 
both seen and heard enough this night to be 



THE WHITE HOODS. 151 

convinced the desperate men thus assembled 
could be only concerned in some evil plans 
against their country, and its existing govern- 
ment. 

Her mind, distracted by these reflections, pre- 
vented her desire to seek immediate repose, and 
walking towards the window of her apartment, 
she threw open the casement^ in the hope to 
revive her sinking spirits. It was now past mid- 
night. The moon rode high in the heavens, 
keeping on her tranquil course amidst thousands 
of glittering fires ; and the milky way shone like 
a veil of brightest silver upon the deep blue ether. 
All was hushed and still, and the lofty spires of 
the churches and convents in Ghent looked, as 
they were illumined by the radiant light that 
streamed upon them, like marble of the whitest 
hue. 

Anna (whose mind was finely sensible to the 
poetic and religious feelings which a view of 
nature is so capable of inspiring,) felt at this 
moment all their effects ; her heart responded to 
the harmony without, for it was innocent ; no 
guilty act, no base passions, had in her breast 
l4 



152 THE WHITE HOODS. 

blunted that lively sensibility towards God and 
his created works, which is too often destroyed 
in the bosom where worldly and degenerate 
feelings rule. 

Anna cast her eyes towards the Heavens, and 
thought upon Him whose word had formed them 
out of nothing : " let there be light, and it was 
so," said Anna. " Oh, merciful, great, and 
benign Creator of Good^ how wonderful are thy 
works ! how inscrutable thy ways ! It is thou, 
and thou only, who canst guide man in safety ; 
and when he turns to his own paths, and for- 
sakes thine, his road is as doubtful and dangerous 
as the path of the wanderer whilst he strays in 
the desert, when those fires, which thy word has 
created and sustained, are shrouded in clouds 
and in total darkness. To thy guidance, then, 
will I submit myself in all things. I will mean 
no ill, act no ill ; I will trust in thee, and thy 
light shall be to me the way and the life ; thy 
rod and thy staff shall sustain me. To adore 
thee do I now contemplate thy works, and not 
as too many erring mortals do, who only look 
upon those bright stars to read with presump- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 153 

tion their own future course, as if thou wouldst 
permit the creatures of thy will to reveal to man 
the destiny which thou hast said he shall never 
find by searching out ; and thou wilt render to 
him the future for good or evil, as his own acts 
deserve." 

Anna retired from the window, closed the 
casement, and prepared to take some rest ; yet 
as she slowly took off her apparel, and unbraided 
her tresses, her mind continued to dwell upon 
the subject nearest to her heart, and more than 
once did she think upon Henry de Cassel. What 
would be his opinion of her ? his suspicions, 
perhaps, of her conduct, should he find that she 
had sought the Earl ? These thoughts she 
endeavoured to dismiss as busy intruders, that 
were likely to interfere with what she deemed to 
be her duty. 

Still anxious to serve her father, and yet to 
preserve as much as possible the native sincerity 
of her character^ an idea struck her that she 
hoped would prove favourable to the virtuous 
feelings with which she should solicit her father's 
pardon. " Yes," said Anna, " I will solicit the 



154 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Earl as he passes into the cathedral to attend 
the mass ; that will be a proper time to beg a 
father's life ; for however profligate Lewis may 
be^ the sanctity of the place, the office in which 
he is about to engage, they may, they must 
inspire him with some pure, some holy feelings. 
He cannot, he would not dare think impro- 
perly of me at such a moment, nor can his own 
guilty passion obtrude itself in such a place. It 
is at the cathedral, then, I will meet him. Yet 
I must be cautious ; the Countess of Artois often 
accompanies her son to mass, and should she or 
Gilbert Matthew recognise me, it may ruin all. 
What must I do then ?" 

Anna mused for a moment, and stood motion- 
less, holding a long braid of her fair hair in her 
hand, whilst the total abstraction of her mind 
had interrupted the occupation of the toilette. 
At length she continued — " Yes, there is one 
way : I will muffle myself in my mantle^ and 
cast a veil about my head ; I will mingle with 
the crowd of mendicants who surround the 
church door to receive an alms of the Earl as he 
enters ; and when he stretches out his hand to 



THE WHITE HOODS. 155 

give me an alms, I will then put into it a paper 
that shall move him to grant my father's life. 
Hence, then, every feeling of pride ! let me pass 
for a beggar ! If that lowly guise can secure 
my honour, I would rather be an actual beggar 
all my life, than Hve without virtue, could I be 
seated on a throne. And to preserve a father's 
life, and Henry's good opinion," she added, 
almost unconsciously, " no appearance can be 
too humble or too mean. It shall be so ; I will 
write the paper before I rest. There are always 
materials in this chamber, for Du Bois occupies 
it when I am not here ; and then I will endeavour 
to sleep." 

Anna again threw on a part of the apparel 
which she had taken off, sat down, and prepared 
for her task. She wrote slowly, for, though 
well educated for her time, she was little accus- 
tomed to the art of composition, so that at the 
best she was but an indifferent writer. She now 
indited two or three papers, which she succes- 
sively tore up, and at length she resolved to 
write as she felt. " For nature," thought Anna^ 
" after all, is the best advocate, and one needs not 



156 THE WHITE HOODS. 

to be a great clerk to know what one feels- or to 
express it." Having come to this determination, 
she wrote a short petition to the Earl, in which 
she asserted, with truth, that her father had not 
intentionally occasioned the death of Gilbert 
Matthew's kinsman. She begged the Earl, 
therefore, to grant him a free pardon, with all 
the energy filial piety could dictate, and with all 
the eloquence of Christian feeling. 

Satisfied in some degree with her own plans 
and intentions, Anna retired to her bed^ and, 
notwithstanding the anxious state of her mind, 
exhausted by the hurry and troubles of the day, 
soon found those tranquil slumbers which are 
the peculiar blessing of health and innocence — 
that peace which passeth all understanding, and 
which the world can neither give nor take away. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 157 



CHAP. VTII. 

When Anna arose the next morning, she pre- 
pared with an anxious heart to put her plan in 
execution ; and having only communicated it in 
part to her father, lest he should oppose a 
project, of whose success she entertained the 
most flattering hope, she bid him farewell, con- 
cealed her person as well as she w^as able, by 
drawing her mantle of black silk close about 
her, threw a white veil over her head, and set 
out on her way to St. Bavon, in order that she 
might place herself at the door of the cathedral, 
to be near the Earl as he passed in to the mass. 
It would be needless to say with how much 
anxiety on the part of Anna, with how many 
hopes and fears, the interval (between her taking 
her station at the door and the arrival of the 
Earl) was filled up. 

At length she heard the sounds of minstrelsy, 
and the movement of the crowd, which the 



158 THE WHITE HOODS. 

public attendance of Lewis at the mass never 
failed to collect, assured her that he was actually 
coming towards the church. Anna now drew 
as near as possible to the space which was kept 
free by his attendants for his entrance, and 
exerted all her efforts to avoid being forced 
back by several of the mendicants, who were 
eager to catch the eye of the Earl, in order to 
solicit an alms. Some of these people were real 
objects of charity, and others only used poverty 
as an excuse for idleness and vice. The most 
bold and importunate held in their hands a 
small brass box^ with a slit in the lid, in order 
to drop into it whatever eleemosynary donations 
they might receive. And their usual method, 
of calling upon the charity of a passenger, was 
by shaking and rattling their boxes as he passed 
along, sometimes accompanying the action with 
a blessing, or a demand on his purse ; or at 
others without a hint being given, save by the 
action itself, a practice still in use amongst 
several of the Flemish mendicants even at the 
present time. 

The music drew nearer and nearer ; and the 
6 



THE WHITE HOODS. 159 

minstrels that preceded the Earl, with man}/ of 
his household^ passed directly into the cathe- 
dral, where the former continued playing their 
sprightly airs, although within the walls of the 
sacred edifice itself. 

The Earl approached ; and Anna was grieved 
to observe that his mother, Margaret, Countess 
of Artois, was leaning upon his arm, and on 
the same side of the pathway where she had 
taken her station. Gilbert Matthew too, she 
remarked, followed in the rear ; and near him 
walked a person who wore a hood, and not the 
chaperon, so put on as to shade the face from 
observation. Who this man was, she could not 
see ; but the proximity of his station to Gilbert 
in the procession, induced her to believe he 
must be one of his seven brothers; for the 
family of the Matthews kept much together^ 
when in pubUc or in private. Sir Roger d'Au- 
terme, the high bailiff of Ghent, was also in the 
retinue with his nephew, Oliver, and John de 
Faucille. 

Whilst Anna cast her eyes upon the Earl, as 
he slowly advanced, a flattering hope stole into 



160 THE WHITE HOODS. 

her bosom that she should succeed in the object 
of her petition, for the countenance of the Lord 
Lewis of Flanders might be said always to 
possess an expression calculated to inspire hope 
in a suppliant_, since the dignity of the prince 
was blended with an air of kindness and affa- 
bility. Perhaps too, Anna's anxious hopes to 
find him all she wished, assisted the favourable 
view in which he now appeared to her. 

His step was unaffected, though slow and 
majestic, and he returned the greetings of the 
crowd with manly courtesy. Whilst his tall 
and noble figure (attired in a suit of blue velvet, 
embroidered with gold, decorated with jewels, 
and surmounted by a rich mantle, lined with 
ermine) attracted the admiration of all be- 
holders. 

The Countess leaned upon the arm of her 
son ; her features were of the same handsome 
contour, and, from their regularity, retained 
some claims to beauty ; yet there was a repelling, 
a haughty character, in her aspect, that de- 
stroyed the favourable effect the courtesy of 
her manners would otherwise have produced. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 161 

She condescended to return the respectful greet- 
ings of the people, but in doing so the ex- 
pression of her countenance shewed she felt it 
to be a condescension, and neither the sight of 
age, poverty, sickness, nor innocence, could 
unbend her brow, or create one kindly look of 
sympathy or feeling. Her alms she bestowed as 
a thing she did not value herself, nor heeded the 
benefit they might afford to others. She coldly 
scattered them around her, indiscriminately, 
from the almonier that hung suspended from her 
girdle, as children would throw away a handful 
of stones, about which they cared nothing. Her 
full and intelligent eyes glanced every where 
around, but fixed no where with any expression 
of interest. Her attire was magnificent; it 
shone with jewels and embroidery ; her hanging 
sleeves fell almost to the ground, whilst the 
train of the crimson velvet mantle was sup- 
ported by a young page. Her forehead, smooth 
and white, was bound by a circle or coronet of 
jewels, placed above a coverchief of the finest 
silver tissue. 

As the Earl advanced along the space that 

VOL. I. M V 



162 THE WHITE HOODS. 

was cleared for him by the chamberlains and 
marshals, he every now and then stopt, as it 
were, a moment, whilst, with more grace and 
good-nature than was exhibited by his mother, 
he dispensed an alms to some aged or suffering 
mendicant, a custom usual with princes when 
they passed on to attend the public mass. 

^' He is drawing near," thought Anna ; " oh 
if I could but catch his eye ! I will cry largesse — 
and then I will slip the paper into his hand as 
he gives me an alms. But he sees me not ; oh 
that I could but catch his eye. I will venture to 
step beyond the line ; if it is but a little, he must 
see me.'' 

She did so ; and the quick glance of the Earl 
was instantly arrested, and turned upon her 
alone. Her dress, although plain, and even 
homely, was not that of a mendicant ; and not- 
withstanding her mantle wrapped close about 
her, and the veil that covered her face, there 
was a grace in the figure of Anna, which, like 
that found in those models of beauty, the statues 
of antiquity, shewed itself, however covered it 
might be with drapei'y. The arm too, which 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 163 

she extended (as she held the paper, ready to 
be presented, in her hand), was finely turned, 
and delicately white. These observations in a 
moment attracted an eye like that of Lewis de 
Male, critically nice in beauty. His curiosity 
was excited ; there was something altogether 
extraordinary in the circumstance. 

" This," said the Earl, as he turned and 
addressed Gilbert Matthew, who was now near 
him, " this is the strangest, and I will warrant 
the fairest beggar that ever yet asked an alms. 
She may, too, be the most unfortunate of all 
mendicants, perhaps a distressed gentlewoman ; 
I will give her gold." 

" Or, perhaps," replied Gilbert, " she may 
be some artful wanton, who displays her white 
hand, and a decent mantle, to excite curiosity, 
and a new kind of sympathy, since rags, the 
proper habiliments of alms-takers, are now too 
common to raise much pity." 

" Be she what she may," said the Earl, " she 
shall not extend that pretty arm to me in vain; 
nay, I will speak to her." 

As Lewis advanced a few paces to do so, the 
M 2 



164 THE WHITE HOODS. 

gold piece of coin, designed for Anna, glittered 
in his hand, and at the very moment he was 
about to speak to her^ an aged woman, of a 
wretched and haggard countenance, (in which 
an expression of frenzy seemed to contend with 
that of malice for pre-eminence^) who was habited 
with nothing remarkable, save a white hood about 
her head, rushed before Anna, and rudely thrust 
her back, as she exclaimed aloud to Lewis de 
Male, '^ To me, to me — the gold to me, not to 
yon muffled trickster." 

Anna alarmed, shrunk back in the crowd, and 
the Earl, incensed and disappointed at the pro- 
bability of losing sight of her in the press, push- 
ed back the hag with some violence, as he ex- 
claimed " Hence, thou cursed white hood, how 
darest thou to interfere." 

" Curse not the white hood, curse it not, proud 
Earl," replied the aged woman, with the utmost 
audacity; " take heed, Lewis, take heed — no man, 
be he prince or beggar, shall ban me unre- 
quited : hark thee, thy curse shall fall upon 
thyself; and mark my words," she continued, as 
she stretched forth her dry and shrivelled arm, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 165 

bent it, and pointed with her finger to her own 
head ; " the white hood thou hast this day cursed 
shall cover thine own with confusion. Remember 
it is I who say it — farewell." 
^ " My son," said the Countess of Artois to the 
Earl, in a low and agitated voice, " my son, give 
her the gold. It is Ursula ; give her gold." 

" Give her gold !" replied the Earl ; " the 
wretched old crone — I will give her nothing but 
the cucking-stool or the stocks ; her tricks pre- 
vail not with me." 

" Stop her then," cried a young man of 
Lewis's train; " stop her; she has publicly 
insulted our prince." 

" She is some madwoman," observed Gilbert 
Matthew. " Better let her pass; she is not 
worth notice." 

^« It is Ursula," again repeated the Countess 
of Artois. '^ I would, my son, that you had 
given her the gold ; her curses never fall in vain 
— she is most powerful — she is a sorceress." 

^' Say rather a cheat, mother," replied the 
Earl. " She seems one of those bold beggars, 
who would make the donor of an alms loosen his 
M 3 



166 THE WHITE HOODS. 

purse strings by exciting terror. Notwithstand- 
ing the edict, Ghent still harbours many such 
hags and witches. A curse upon her tongue, 
she has affrighted away that poor girl. I would 
have relieved her but for the old white hood's 
brawling, and now I do not see her in the 
crowd. Did you mark which way she went, 
Gilbert ?" 

'^ No, my lord," answered the new deacon of 
the pilots ; " I only saw her shrink back when 
the old woman thrust herself before you : the 
girl seemed frighted, and perhaps is gone.'' 

" It is most likely," answered the Earl. " Let 
us forward to the mass." 

Whilst this brief conversation passed, the 
woman with the white hood had retired sulkily 
from the press. As she went on, no one dared 
to stop her. Indeed, all made way for her, as 
they would for a being whose will no one cared 
to cross, since, in fact, she was looked upon by 
the multitude as a creature possessed of powers 
and knowledge more than human. Anna also 
had retired ; for when she heard the hag de- 
nounce her as a *' muffled trickster,'^ she felt so 



THE WHITE HOODS. 167 

alarmed lest a discovery should be the conse- 
quence, that abandoning her purpose of pre- 
senting the letter to the Earl at the church door, 
she immediately shrunk back, and endeavoured 
to make her way through the crowd ; but her 
escape could not be so eagily accomplished as 
that of Ursula, since no one feared Anna, 
therefore no one made way for her ; and in 
struggling to free herself from the press, her veil 
caught, and was pulled off her head. She re- 
gained it as speedily as possible, and replaced it, 
but not till many eyes had thus obtained an 
opportunity of gazing on her, and of calling up 
a crimson flood into her cheeks. 

After this accident, Anna felt still more eager 
to escape ; she again struggled to pass the crowd, 
and just as she was on the point of succeeding, 
some one came softly behind her, laid a hand 
gently upon her shoulder, and whispered in her 
ear, " Take no notice of me — do not look 
round for the world, but go into the cathedral 
— pass to the Lady Chapel — stay there till I 
come. I will help you." The astonishment of 
Anna was only equalled by her agitation, for she 
M 4 



168 THE WHITE HOODS. 

knew too well the slightest accents of the voice 
of Henry de Cassel, to be deceived in thinking 
these words had been uttered by himself. 

Anna's spirits were now so much weakened by 
a succession of alarms, that the least thing filled 
her with nervous apprehension, even Henry's 
sudden presence made her tremble, yet she 
obeyed him, and forbore to look back ; but she 
could not help fancying, by the movement of the 
crowd about her, that they made way for him 
readily enough, although they had not stirred an 
inch to accommodate herself. She now waited 
a short time, almost without moving from the 
spot where Henry had thus mysteriously ad- 
dressed her. At length, perceiving the mob dis- 
persing in all directions, she ventured to steal 
into the cathedral^ by a side door of one of the 
aisles, and made her way into the Lady Chapel. 

The Lady Chapel was a small lateral building 
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and decorated 
with a profusion of the finest Gothic carvings, 
paintings, and devices ; the altar being literally 
covered with the rich offerings of devotees to her 
shrine. Anna devoutly kneeled before the ihiage 



THE WHITE HOODS. 169 

of the Holy Virgin, that stood, in sculptured 
pomp and jewelled splendour, within a niche 
above the altar, and, after repeating an Ave 
Maria, she sunk upon a cushion, anxiously to 
await the arrival of Henry ; but how he could 
possibly assist her, or how he should even guess 
his assistance could be wanting, seemed to her 
inexplicable mysteries. 

She was not, however, long kept in suspense, 
for Henry soon appeared, and closing the door 
of the little chapel with some caution as he 
entered, he ran towards Anna and greeted her 
with the warmest burst of impassioned feeling — 
indeed^ he seemed not to think for what purpose 
he came thither^ and to forget all in the remem- 
brance that he was near her. 

Anna, at length fixed her eyes imploringly 
upon him, and conjured him. to lose no time in 
affording her the promised assistance ; " for, I 
suppose," added she, " you must know some- 
thing of what now presses so much on my mind, 
else how could you have offered to aid me." 

" I have heard much, indeed, Anna," replied 



170 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Henry, " since I saw you last night ; for on my 
return to the hotel of the Moon, I there learnt 
the fatal effects of the fray with the Matthews, 
and that your father's life was in the utmost 
peril. I knew you to-day, in spite of your 
mantle and veil ; for, remember Anna, how often 
you have worn that simple dress in the woods of 
St. Omer. I observed, too, a paper in your 
hand : no eye was so fixed upon you as mine, 
since no heart was so much interested for you. 
To me it appeared evident you wished to pre- 
sent that paper to the Earl of Flanders. I could 
easily then guess upon what anxious subject you 
would solicit him^ when I knew that justice was 
in arms against your father's life." 

" And where, then, were you?" enquired 
Anna. " I saw you not. But, Holy Virgin ! 
how changed, Henry, is your attire ! Are you^ 
too^ of the court ?" 

" I have been there to-day," replied Henry, 
" and followed in my lord's train to the cathe- 
dral. But - come, let us speak of your business, 
that is more important — and I dare not stay. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 171 

Tell me, would you wish to solicit the Earl for 
your father's pardon — to free him from the 
consequences of this charge of murder." 

'' It is the first wish of my soul to obtain his 
pardon/' said Anna; " but I was disappointed 
in my plan ; and should the Countess of Artois 
or Gilbert Matthew discover me within the 
palace, before I could see the Earl, they would 
ruin my chance of success, and drive me thence 
with scorn." 

" They shall do neither," answered Henry. 
" I can and will serve you. You shall see the 
Earl in safety to yourself. But," he added, 
with considerable emotion, " but I know too 
well the Earl's former disgraceful passion for 
you, not to fear this interview. Oh, Anna, your 
virtue I can trust, but not your experience. 
You know nothing of the arts of men when 
they abandon principle for profligacy. You — 
young, innocent, and beautiful, trusting others, 
as you are yourself worthy to be trusted — I 
tremble when I think into what dangers, what 
deceptions^ nay, what temptations, you may fall. 
Lewis de Male is vehement in all his feelings : 



172 THE WHITE HOODS. 

I fear the sight of you will awake his slumbering 
passion ; but I conjure you, let not even your 
father's safety induce you to listen to his vows of 
love." 

" I will not/' said Anna, '' I will not encou- 
rage them." 

" You must not hear them," replied Henry ; 
" for should you but listen to his protestations, 
he may hope hereafter to win you on his own 
terms, and should he do so, be sure of it, ruin 
and misery must overwhelm both you and me. 
The vengeance of Lewis would be fearful, as 
his power absolute. Take no token from him, 
promise him nothing, or at least nothing but 
gratitude, in requital for your father's life. Re- 
member my words. May God prosper you !" 

Anna was so overcome by the subject of this 
address, which kept pace with her own fears, 
that she could only faintly answer, " she would 
be prudent ;" for the scene of the previous 
night (that had so acted upon her feelings as to 
determine her at all events to obtain her father's 
pardon, in the hope to win him from his asso- 
ciates,) she was sworn to keep secret. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 173 

Henry then drew a ring from his finger, and 
placed it upon one of her's, and directed her to 
proceed to the EarPs palace of Andrighien as soon 
as the mass should be over. " Go," said he, '^ to 
the garden entrance towards the south; the 
warder of that entrance is well known to me, 
indeed he is in some measure indebted to me. 
Shew him that ring, he will know it for mine, 
and bid him conduct you where you may obtain 
a private audience of the Earl. Go thither one 
hour after the mass ; do simply what I tell you, 
but hold no discourse with the warder. Shew 
him but the ring ; and in the mean time I will 
endeavour to apprize him of your coming, and 
instruct him what to do. Farewell, my beloved 
Anna ! I must leave you. Remember my 
counsel — one hour after mass. Adieu ! I shall 
see you again when you least expect me." 

Anna promised to observe all his directions, 
bade him farewell, and resumed her station in 
the Lady Chapel, thinking it better to continue 
there till the mass was over, as she should be less 
observed in her way to Andrighien, when the 
crowd had entirely dispersed. 



174 THE WHITE HOODS. 



CHAR IX. 

When the great bell of St. Bavon struck the 
hour that was to be the signal of Anna's depar- 
ture for the palace of Andrighien, she started 
from her seat, and once more addressing a 
prayer to the Virgin to prosper her enterprise, 
she quitted the Lady Chapel, and set out upon 
her way, avoiding as much as possible the most 
public streets in her passage through Ghent, and 
at length passed the city gates without meeting 
any interruption. 

The new and beautiful palace of Andrighien, 
which Lewis de Male had erected at an immense 
cost, stood about one mile distant from the walls 
of Ghent, in the midst of a fertile, though flat 
country, and surrounded by delightful pleasure 
grounds and gardens. It was here the Earl 
had chiefly resided since the death of his wife, 
and it was here that he was frequently visited by 
his mother the Countess of Artois, whose supe- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 175 

rior abilities for state matters and state intrigues, 
induced her to keep a wary eye upon her less 
politic son, over whom she still retained a power 
and an authority Lewis had vainly endeavoured 
to shake off; for the wisdom of her counsels, and 
the decision of her conduct, had really been of 
the utmost service to him in moments of emer- 
gency. His mother was also Countess of Artois 
in her own right, with the privilege to bestow 
that county upon whomsoever she pleased at her 
death. She had considerable influence at the 
court of France^ and could command the Duke 
of Burgundy in almost any matter connected 
with her son's interest or her own, since, by her 
means, the Duke had espoused the only child of 
Lewis de Male by his deceased Countess, a girl 
but fourteen years of age. 

The Earl himself had been married^ for reasons 
of state policy, when very young, so that he had 
become a widower, and his only child a wife, 
when he was but yet thirty-six years old. 

Anna implicitly obeyed the directions of 
Henry de Cassel, and bent her steps towards 
the south entrance of the palace garden, wliere 



176 THE WHITE HOODS. 

a tower which flanked a part of the boundary 
walls was inhabited by the warder of whom 
Henry had made mention, Anna, upon shew- 
ing him the ring, obtained instant admittance, 
and requested him, as she had been directed, to 
afford her the means of a private interview with 
the Earl. Whilst she made this request she 
blushed, ashamed to express^ even to a domestic, 
her desire for an interview liable to the most 
cruel misconstruction. 

Yet at the sight of the ring, the warder ad- 
dressed her with the most marked respect, and 
saying that the Earl usually walked in the gar- 
den about noon, if she would place herself in a 
little Gothic pleasure-house which stood near 
the tower, he doubted not she would have an 
opportunity of seeing him alone. Lewis de 
Male, who, it may be right to apprize the 
reader, was both a patron and a lover of learn- 
ing, generally past an hour or two there each 
day ; for he made it his private study. 

" But," said Anna, in a hesitating manner, 
<^ may not the Countess come with him, or 
Gilbert Matthew ? or " 



THE WHITE HOODS. 177 

" No^" replied the warder, " not this morn- 
ing, since neither the Countess nor Gilbert are 
yet returned from the city, and I saw my lord 
in the garden but now, alone^ after parting with 
his kinsman. Sir Walter D'Anghien ; besides," 
continued the warder, " when the Lord Lewis 
passes my post, I will tell him that a fair lady 
awaits to see him in the pleasure-house, and at 
such a hearing he will not delay to go to it." 

Anna again blushed, but forbore to make any 
farther enquiry, for she remembered the injunc- 
tions of Henry, to avoid discoursing with the 
warder ; and, beyond what seemed necessary to 
be said, the man himself appeared to be as little 
disposed to communicate with her. She fol- 
lowed him, therefore, in silence to the pleasure- 
house, where the Earl delighted to pass his pri- 
vate hours, and where he occasionally cultivated 
talents which, but for his profligate manners, 
would have reflected honour upon his country. 

The pleasure-house was admirably adapted as 
a place for study, since it stood sequestered, 
surrounded by trees, and watered by a small 
stream that ran near it, whose low murmurs 

VOL, I. N 



178 THE WHITE HOODS. 

were calculated to soothe and compose the mind. 
In the apartnient where Anna was conducted, 
she observed several manuscripts, and writing 
materials, with loose parchments and papers, 
that lay scattered upon a table in the centre of 
the room. 

A blue velvet mantle, lined with ermine, was 
carelessly lying upon a chair ; it seemed by this 
circumstance that the Earl had already been in 
the room, and had, most probably, for the day 
was sultry, cast off the mantle of state in which 
he had appeared at the mass. Anna paused to 
think in what manner she should address him, 
and as her mind was thus engaged, she drew 
from her bosom the paper she had intended to 
present that morning, and re-perused the con- 
tents ; thinking perhaps she had better give it to 
the Earl at once, and thus spare herself the pain 
of first breaking the subject to him by words. 

Whilst Anna was thus absorbed in thought, 
holding the paper with her eyes fixed upon it, 
the door opened, and Lewis de Male suddenly 
stood before her. Abashed, affrighted^ and sur- 
prised, Anna lost her presence of mind, and 
5 



THE WHITE HOODS. 179 

letting fall the paper, she clasped her hands 
together, and cast a wild and disordered glance 
upon the Earl ; still too much agitated to speak, 
she sank upon her knees before him, and could 
only, in a supplicating manner, look up in his 
face. 

'^ Anna !" said Lewis. ^« Rise, fairest Anna^ 
and tell me, I beseech you, what chance has 
brought hither the daughter of John Lyon ?'* 

" She is here to implore you that she may 
still be a daughter," replied Anna, trembling as 
she spoke, '^ and not the orphan of a beloved 
father. Oh, my lord, if ever you hope to enjoy 
peace on earth, or happiness in heaven, read 
over this paper." ( She took it from the ground 
and offered it to Lewis.) "I — I wrote it, 
but I am now too much agitated to plead, as I 
would do, my own cause ; read, then — read the 
paper." 

There was such an energy in the manner in 

which Anna urged her request^ such an agonised 

anxiety depicted in her countenance, that Lewis 

could not refuse her ; lie took the paper from 

N 2 



180 THE WHITE HOODS. 

her hand in silence, and immediately read it 
with attention. 

" Is this really so ?" said he. '« Was John 
Lyon, then, but the involuntary agent of this 
man's death ? I was told otherwise." 

" Oh, it was false ! most false ! whoever told 
you so," replied Anna. '' My father is innocent. 
You can^ my lord — oh, you will — you will save 
his life." 

'^ And how, Anna," answered the Earl, " how 
can I save a man who has injured me in the 
tenderest point; who has withdrawn fi'om my 
court, and secreted from my view, the treasure, 
the joy, of my life — yourself, Anna ?" 

" My lord_," said the trembling girl, as she 
blushed deeply, " do not, I conjure you, blame 
my father. In what he did, it was to comply 
with my request ; and oh ! forgive me when I 
say, that in justice you cannot blame him ; he 
but disobeyed your commands as an earthly 
prince, to observe those of the King of Heaven." 

'^ And what," said the Earl, ^^ what am I now 
to hope, if I grant this pardon ?" 



THE WHITE HOODS. 181 

^« For the prayers," answered Anna, " of her 
you will have saved from the sorrows of the 
fatherless — prayers that never knock at Heaven's 
gates in vain. The gratitude, the heartfelt gra- 
titude, of one who will daily bless your name ; 
and as she begs Heaven's choicest gifts to fall 
upon your head, will think of her prince as the 
guardian and the father of his people." 

^« And will return the obligation," replied 
Lewis^ " by shunning the presence of that prince 
who adores her, even as she would shun the 
society of the lowest and most worthless vassal 
of his dominions. No^ Anna, your father has 
deceived me once, but he shall never do so more. 
If my passion is hateful to you, you have to thank 
him for its birth. It was your father who first 
brought you to me ; it was your father who 
fanned the infant flame with hope; he did so 
to gratify a vain ambition, and now he must 
suffer, or you must abide its consequence." 

'^^ Is there no other way?" said Anna, greatly 

distressed. Sinking again upon her knees, she 

caught his hand^ and with a mixture of boldness 

and tender feeling in her manner, spoke to him, 

n3 



182 THE WHITE HOODS. 

not with that distance she would observe to the 
prince, but as calling upon the pity of a fellow- 
creature : " Oh, my lord, say not thus ; do not 
violate the filial piety of a daughter, by making 
a thing so holy the instrument of guilty lest it 
fall with bitter retribution on your own head ; 
you are yourself a father; think but upon that, 
and nature^ who never pleads in vain, will speak 
to your heart, and tell you, that however human 
frailty may err in seeking the good of a child, 
the error should be looked upon with mercy. 
A child, remember, that has been cradled in a 
parent's arms in helpless infancy, is dear, dear 
beyond every thing on earth ; and that to save a 
daughter's innocence, a father would brave every 
peril, even to the death." 

" Your father has deserved to die," said the 
Earl, ^* for he has deceived me ; yet for your 
sake, Anna, I would do much ; I would have 
done all that man can do for woman's love ; I 
would have married you, but for that curse 
which binds princes to wed for state occasions." 

" My lord," replied Anna, modestly, " such 
a marriage would have been beyond my desires 



THE WHITE HOODS. 183 

or my degree. The circle of high-born honour 
would be awS unseemly upon the brows of a poor 
burgher's daughter, as to call her wife would be 
beneath the dignity of a prince. All things seek 
their order and their kind. The lion, lord of 
the forest that he ranges, mates not with the kid ; 
nor could the eagle stoop from the crested rock, 
or leave to gaze upon the sun^ and seek to pair 
with the lowlier tenant of the woods. I could 
never have been your equal, my lord, how then 
could I become your wife ? I should but have 
disgraced the mantle of state by my homely 
bearing." 

^« You would have honoured it by your beauty 
and your worth/' replied the Earl; " but that 
cannot be. Hear me, Anna; as a prince, as a 
judge, your father's life is in my absolute power. 
You are also in my power, for did I need a pre- 
text to detain you, the law of Ghent would give it 
me — I could find it, by holding you as the near 
kindred of a man so charged, and so suspected. 
But know, I will not stoop to force ; it is that 
heart, that mind, I value in you — it is there I 
would gain an interest, and by your own free 
N 4 



184 THE WHITE HOODS. 

will. Without your heart to accompany the 
gift, you, Anna, would be of little worth to 
Lewis." 

^' And of still less with it_," replied Anna, 
" when that heart became corrupted. Oh, do 
not, my prince, so far debase your noble nature, 
to use the power you hold but as God's steward 
here on earth, to abuse a simple maiden. Here," 
added Anna, and she went towards the table, 
and took up a blank paper that lay upon it; 
'' here, my lord, do an act of mercy — write but 
your gracious pardon for my father, and every 
word shall find its register in Heaven to bless 
you. Nay, I can write the pardon_, so you will 
but sign it — put but your name to the paper, 
and he shall live, and I will daily breathe that 
name in my prayers to listening angels." 

The Earl hesitated — he walked towards the 
table^ and laid his hand upon the paper : whilst 
Anna, exulting in the hopes which this action 
gave her, her cheeks flushed, her hands pressed 
together in all the breathless anxiety of sus- 
pended expectation, stood mute and motionless. 
The Earl looked upon her, and, struck by the 



THE WHITE HOODS. 185 

matchless beauty of her countenance, (now ani- 
mated by every feeling of her soul, through the 
anxious circumstances of her fate,) he could not 
resist the moment of temptation. He ceased_5 
therefore, to make the effort, and his better pur- 
pose entirely forsook him. 

^^ No, Anna," he exclaimed, " no, on one 
condition only will I grant the pardon. It is, 
that you will see me — that you will hear me — 
that I may hope to gain by my devoted love 
some place in your affections. Do this — give 
me but the slightest hope, and your father 
lives. And that you really do so, accept some 
token of my love. " Here," added the Earl, as 
he drew a magnificent chain of massive gold (the 
same manufactured by the master of the gold- 
smiths) from his neck, " wear this, my Anna ; it 
was designed as a gift to a dear kinsman, Sir 
Walter D'Anghien, but no one can be so dear 
to Lewis as yourself. Wear it, and let me 
hope." 

Anna, who stood like one pursued to the verge 
of a precipice, who fears alike to go forward or 



186 THE WHITE HOODS. 

to draw back, dreaded to incense the Earl by a 
violent opposition to his wishes, and yet she 
could not so far dissemble as to give her assent 
to the proposal. To accept the token would be 
to encourage Lewis's hopes ; she endeavoured^ 
therefore, and in her case it was a pardonable 
subterfuge, to waive the proposal altogether. 
'^ My lord," she said, " I dare not wear the 
token : think how fatal to me might be the con- 
sequence^ should the Countess of Artois view 
your gift upon my neck. She would know again 
a thing so precious, and that it must have come 
from you." 

Even the Earl appeared for a moment em- 
barrassed by this objection, for he really feared 
his mother : *^ She need not know it," replied 
he ; '' you may say the chain was the gift of the 
old rich Baroness, who loved you so well^ and 
quitted our court to end her days as a nun." 

'^ No, my lord," replied Anna, " I cannot so 
dissimulate; and, believe me, truth will more 
adorn my mind than the finest chain of gold 
could my person, when it must be suspended by 



THE WHITE HOODS. 18'7 

falsehood round my neck. I cannot take the 
token ; for if I did, the world should know it 
to be yours." 

" Nay, but you shall," said the Earl ; " I will 
fear no mother, either for you or for myself. 
I will act freely, in spite of the Countess of 
Artois. Mark me, Anna, I will not now urge 
you to speak all I could wish to hear. Only be 
silent, and I will fancy your very silence as 
favourable to my hopes. Wear that token, and 
as long as it hangs about your neck, I will 
continue to hope for the future ; it shall be the 
sign of a compact between us ; and I will grant 
the pardon." 

" No^ my lord, no," eagerly cried Anna, ^' I 
cannot; I will not even silently assent to my 
own shame ; never will I do so ; keep your gift, 
and leave me innocent." 

^^ Aye, and fatherless," replied the artful 
Lewis. " Adieu, Anna ! our conference is ended. 
The provost marshal is already in possession of 
the warrant to authorize your father's death the 
moment he is taken. Gilbert Matthew procured 
it last night, ere search was made for him," 



188 THE WHITE HOODS. 

The Earl turned to depart. Anna rushed 
between him and the door^ and seizing him by 
his vest, as her countenance changed to ashy 
whiteness, she exclaimed, in a voice of agony, 
" Stay^ yet stay ; grant me the pardon, and I 
will wear the token." Lewis eagerly assisted 
her to rise, pressed her in his embrace, and 
threw the chain of gold about her neck. " But 
oh !'* she added, as she looked upon it, '^ how 
gladly would I exchange these golden links, 
for chains of iron, in the deepest dungeon, so I 
might save my father, and yet " 

"^ Peace, Anna, peace," cried the Earl, " do 
not make me once more revoke my mercy; 
remember our compact; aye, it is a compact. 
Here," he continued, as he hastily wrote the 
paper, " here is your father's pardon : but 
remember ! once remove that chain from your 
neck by your own act, refuse to see me, or to 
give me hope, and look to Heaven as your 
only father ; for I swear, by all that I believe 
on earth, by all that I may hope or dread here- 
after, from that moment he shall die; I leave 
you now to think upon it. Farewell," 



THE WHITE HOODS. 189 

The Earl departed, exulting in his success of 
having engaged Anna to wear a chain of gold, 
as a love-token, about her neck; for Lewis^ 
notwithstanding his superior talents and sense, 
believed in a superstition common to his country 
and his time, which considered^ that so long as 
such a token should be worn with the consent 
of the wearer, it would act as a spell or charm 
to bind the beloved object to the giver of the 
pledge. 

Anna carefully deposited the pardon within 
her bosom, and hastened to depart from the 
pleasure-house. As she quitted the little path- 
way, which wound amidst the trees that sur- 
rounded this sequestered spot^ she heard a 
rusding amongst their leaves, and turning a hasty 
glance in that direction, she espied, in part, the 
figure of a man^ who seemed to be lurking 
near. Alarmed at the circumstance, and wishing 
to avoid observation^ she now quickened her 
pace, hastened towards the tower by which she 
had entered, and departed with all speed, and 
once more found herself safe in the road to 
Ghent. 



190 THE WHITE HOODS. 

And now that her object was achieved, now 
that she no longer felt apprehensions for her 
father's life, the difficulties of her own situation, 
the involuntary, and yet acquiescing, part she 
had taken in the EarPs proposal, weighed heavily 
upon her mind. The tumult of suspended ex- 
pectation and fluctuating hope had subsided, 
but it was succeeded by a deep and melancholy 
presage of coming evil ; and the horrible scene 
she had witnessed on the previous night, a 
scene she was sworn to conceal, awakened ap- 
prehensions that made her think the pardon she 
now carried to her father, might soon, perhaps^ 
be revoked^ or prove of little essential benefit to 
him. 

These reflections rapidly succeeded each other, 
as she bent her steps towards Ghent j and at 
length, after many efforts, she brought her mind 
to the pious resolution, to endeavour to banish 
for a time all fears upon her own account; if 
possible, to forget herself, in the efforts she de- 
termined to make to withdraw her father from 
his desperate associates. 

Anna entered within the city gates without 



THE WHITE HOODS. 191 

interruption, and^ eager to convey to John Lyon 
the good news of her successful mission^ she 
determined now to take the direct way, and not 
to lengthen her walk circuitously for the purpose 
of concealment. She turned down a handsome 
street, therefore, near the walls of the city, 
where a few houses^ belonging to some of the 
wealthy merchants^ or more opulent burghers 
of Ghent, had small enclosed gardens in front of 
them. 

But scarcely had she entered the street, when 
her ears were assailed with loud and tumultuous 
shouts, and she soon perceived that a large 
body of men were passing up this very street 
in the order of a procession, accompanied by a 
multitude, or rather mob, composed of the 
lower order of the people, and all the idle 
boys of the place. Greatly alarmed, and 
fearing lest any unfortunate accident might 
occasion her loss of the pardon (notwith- 
standing it was secured within her bosom), 
she hesitated a moment what to do. She 
could not hope to make her way through 
such a crowd, and she saw plainly it was not 



192 THE WHITE HOODS. 

a, religious procession. If she retreated, she 
might be forced along with the advancing mul- 
titude — she might be insulted. What to do^ she 
knew not; and for a moment stood stilly irre- 
solute how to act. 

In this emergency, she heard a citizen, who 
was looking on, say to his companion near him, 
'^ There they go ; it is the deputation. They 
are going to Andrighien, to demand from the 
Earl Sir Simon de Bete ; for Lewis has secured 
in his prison of Ecclo one of the burgomasters 
of Ghent, an act which even his authority 
cannot lawfully accomplish, without a warrant 
from the city magistrates to commit their fellow 
officer. It is a breach of their franchises that 
may cost the Earl a world of trouble, if he 
does not give Sir Simon liberty upon their 
demand." 

This at once explained to Anna the nature of 
the procession, and accounted for the tumultuous 
manner of the mob, which now advanced nearer 
and nearer, till Anna found herself almost sur- 
rounded by the crowd, and forced against the 
gate of one of those small gardens in front of 



THE WHITE HOODS. 193 

the houses before noticed. Her fears made her 
bold, and she no longer hesitated to pass within 
the gate to seek temporary shelter ; and, indeed^ 
she needed it, for her mantle, which she had 
carefully wrapped about her on leaving the 
palace, had been so violently pulled back by the 
sudden rush of the people, that the clasp had 
given way and was broken, and the dress she 
wore beneath, with the splendid chain of 
gold upon her neck, could not but be visible 
to all. 

She retreated, therefore, into the little garden, 
and observing a lady standing in that part of it 
nearest to the house, as if looking on to witness 
the bustle in the street, Anna had no doubt this 
lady was the mistress of the house, and immedi- 
ately advanced towards her, to ask a tempo- 
rary shelter, and to explain the cause of her 
intrusion. 

The lady she addressed was a young woman 
of extraordinary beauty. Her figure was of the 
middling stature, and finely formed. Her eyes 
and hair were of a dark colour, the former bril- 
liant and expressive. Her complexion, though 

VOL. I. o 



194 THE WHITE HOODS. 

brown, was exquisitely clear and transparent ; and 
her mouthy of the Hveliest carnation, might have 
rivalled in grace and symmetry that of the finest 
antique statue. Her air was so noble, and her 
dress so rich, that had Anna seen her at Andrig- 
hien, she would have taken the fair stranger for a 
woman of the highest birth. Yet the fashion of her 
attire was not such as Anna would herself have 
adopted ; it was something too gay, too liberal, 
in displaying the person of the wearer, which, 
beautiful as it was, might have found a more 
attractive grace, had modesty cast a veil over 
charms thus exposed, that seemed to proclaim a 
consciousness of their beauty, but an indelicacy- 
as to the sense of their effect. 

Whilst the stranger looked at Anna with such 
fixed attention as almost made the bashful girl 
tremble, a shade of anger seemed to steal over 
her dark and beautiful brow. When she spok«, 
which she did fluently and well, her accent pro- 
claimed her to be a foreigner. She replied, to 
Annans excuse for her intrusion, with a slight 
assurance that she was welcome to remain where 
she was till the crowd had past; and she added, 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 195 

with a sarcastic sneer, that curled her lip as she 
spoke, " You may also adjust your mantle before 
you depart ; since I suppose you would not wil- 
lingly walk through the public streets tricked 
out with such a chain as that about your neck, 
that every one may know you have assumed the 
golden shackles of a prince, to grace a burgher's 
daughter." 

Anna, surprised, shocked, and embarrassed by 
this speech, neither knew how to reply to it, nor 
what to think. She stood, with a countenance 
alternately changing from red to white, abso- 
lutely mute with astonishment. She had but 
that instant returned from Andrighien — no 
person had followed her — no one had been 
present when the Earl threw the chain about hei* 
neck, and no one could possibly even have seen 
it upon her, till her mantle was almost torn from 
her as she entered the gate. 

Anna was not superstitious ; that is, not for 
the age in which she lived, when superstition was 
a part of religious faith. A belief, however, in 
the agency of familiar spirits, in charms and 
spells, with a dark and presumptuous enquiry 
o 2 



196 THE WHITE HOODS. 

into futurity, which was hkewise characteristic 
of the age, were things wholly disregarded by 
Anna. She did not, therefore, suppose the 
stranger was indebted to any such means for 
her extraordinary knowledge of the circum- 
stances connected with the chain, and felt but 
the more alarmed by this want of credulity; 
since any other maiden in Ghent but herself 
would have set it down to the score of witch- 
craft. 

Anna was too innocent to frame falsehoods, 
and even in excuses she was but an awkward 
practitioner. She knew not how to answer the 
stranger, but still she felt that stranger had no 
right to enquire into her affairs. She, there- 
fore, said nothing in reply, but hastily re- 
adjusted her mantle, with an air of confusion 
and embarrassment. Still the stranger seemed 
to fix her thoughts upon the chain. 

" I know it well," said she ; " it is of no com- 
mon workmanship. But I will not enquire. I 
have no right to ask it of you. But come, I will 
fasten your mantle — your hand trembles so, 
you can scarcely do it yourself Stay a little — 



THE WHITE HOODS. 197 

there, closer, draw it closer, to hide those 
golden links. Why, aye, maiden, that will do ; 
and now they are as much concealed from sight, 
beneath thy garment, as one day will be the 
sorrow, the deep pangs of remorse, within thy 
bosom, which now is thus adorned. Take heed — 
the gifts of princes to young maids are but like 
the nets of the fowler, surely set and baited, that 
tempt poor birds to come within them, but they 
never depart thence till their plumage is rifled, 
and their life is gone." The stranger paused a 
moment, and looking sternly upon Anna, added, 
in an angry tone, " So may it be with you ; for 
why should I wish it otherwise ; and you will 
not escape if Lewis de Male spreads the snare. 
So now begone — the crowd is dispersed — 
leave my presence ; you have tarried here too 
long already." 

There was such a tone of displeasure, such an 
air of command in the stranger, when she pro- 
nounced these last words, that Anna, not know- 
ing what to think, and greatly alarmed, needed 
no other intimation to be gone. She bowed her 
head to the ungentle lady, and walking away as 
o 3 



198 THE WHITE HOODS. 

fast as her agitated limbs would bear her, re- 
gained the street, and in a short time she had 
the happiness of clasping her father's neck, as 
she sobbed with joy, and gave the pardon into 
his hands. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 199 



CHAP. X. 

We must now leave Anna to rejoice, as she 
did sincerely, in having procured the pardon for 
her father, and to make her repeated, but fruit- 
less, attempts to withdraw him from his dan- 
gerous associates, whilst we say something about 
the lady in whose garden she had taken a tem- 
porary shelter, and from whose presence she was 
so ungraciously dismissed. 

The reader will probably recollect the affair 
concerning a gold chain, mentioned in the second 
chapter of this narrative, and that the chain had 
been made by Sir Simon de Bete, at the express 
command of the Earl of Flanders, but sold, from 
mistake, during the absence of the little gold- 
smith, to Philip Von Artaveld, who presented it 
to his Italian mistress, the beautiful Bianca. He 
must also be aware, that upon discovering the 
mistake, the termagant wife of Sir Simon had 
regained possession of the chain, which at length 
o 4 



200 THE WHITE HOODS- 

found its way into the hands of the person by 
whom it was bespoke — the Earl of Flanders. 

Having thus briefly recapitulated these cir- 
cumstances, the reader will no longer feel sur- 
prised that the foreign lady, who was no other 
than Bianca herself, should so readily recognise 
the chain, and give a shrewd guess by whom it 
had been bestowed upon the daughter of John 
Lyon. 

Bianca had before seen Anna in public, and 
knew who she was, although Anna had never 
before observed her. Thus the remarks which 
the Italian addressed to her, however mysterious 
they might seem to Anna^ were easily accounted 
for ; since Lewis's admiration of the daughter of 
the late deacon of the pilots, and her subsequent 
retreat from the court, had furnished forth a 
plentiful harvest, to be reaped and gathered in 
alike by courtiers and gossips, who, each viewing 
the subject agreeably to their own fancy or dis- 
position, gave birth to the usual variety of 
reports, which, having circulated their due round, 
died away and were forgotten, as fresh subjects 
of scandal and novelty occurred. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 201 

All these reports were remembered by Bianca^ 
but the sight of that particular chain upon 
Anna's neck aroused in her bosom feelings that 
induced her, as soon as Anna had departed, to 
resolve upon an immediate visit to no less a 
person than Ursula, the reputed sorceress, who 
so boldly solicited an alms, and cursed the Earl 
of Flanders at the church-door. 

At the period of our narrative a belief in sor- 
cery, witchcraft, and astrology^ was so imiversally 
diffused and encouraged throughout Europe, 
that, notwithstanding the severe laws enacted 
against persons dealing in such arts^ there was 
neither country, city, nor town, but possessed 
some one who had the reputation of possessing 
such supernatural powers; and the study of 
magic was considered as much a science as that 
of mathematics in the present day. Although 
the regular professors of the black art sometimes 
suffered the severest penalties of the law, for their 
real or supposed offences, yet they were more 
frequently winked at, and allowed to go on in 
their course, by the very persons whose duty it 
was to suppress them. For this conniving toler- 



202 THE WHITE HOODS. 

ation the professors were, no doubt, indebted to 
the supposed services they might occasionally 
render to the tolerators themselves, by withdraw- 
ing the veil from futurity ; and sometimes by the 
convenient agency of making them the instru- 
ments of doing an ill turn to an enemy, without 
the danger of detection, or even of suspicion as 
to the original instigators of so dark and secure 
a mode of revenge. The chronicles of the olden 
time exhibit many examples of this description, 
and particularly in Flanders, where no plot was 
carried on, no bad design put in execution, 
without the advice, and even co-operation, of 
some celebrated witch or magician.* 



* Froissart relates a curious story of an enchanter, who pro- 
mised the Duke of Anjou that he would, by the power of his 
art, cause the castle of an enemy to surrender to him. " I 
can," said the sorcerer, " make the air so thick over the sea, 
that those in the castle shall think it a large bridge, on which 
ten men may march in front ; and when they see this bridge, 
they will be so frightened they will surrender themselves to 
you, lest, if you attack them, they be taken by storm." The 
Duke of Anjou, astonished at what he heard, called his knights, 
to whom he related what the enchanter had just told him. 
They were very much surprised, but seemed willing to give 
him faith for it. See Johnes's Froissart, vol. vi, page 41. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 203 

It may readily be supposed that a trade which 
inspired a mingled feeling of fear and reverence, 
that was productive of profit, and^ by the very 
mystery of its character, afforded an excellent 
screen to falsehood and fraud, could never be 
wanting either in disciples or professors, in fools 
to believe, and rogues to teach. Hence it arose, 
that whenever a worthless character, or a vaga- 
bond, possessed sufficient craft and abilities to 
delude the more simple of their fellow-creatures 
by acquiring a few mysterious tricks, that were 
calculated to impose upon the senses, they set 
up the trade of astrologers or witches, and 
assumed a language which, fi'om its ambiguity, 
was capable of the utmost latitude of interpre- 
tation ; whilst their mysterious predictions, often 
fashioned, by the weak-witted mortals to whom 
they were addressed, to agree with their own 
peculiar circumstances, appeared to the mind 
thus prepossessed, to be literally fulfilled, and 
were considered as devoutly true. 

It is by no means improbable that many of 
these wretched traffickers in the black art, com- 
menced with deluding others, and ended with 



204 THE WHITE HOODS. 

deluding themselves ; and, from a constant ex- 
citement of the imagination, brought upon them- 
selves a degree of madness^ till they at length 
believed they v^^ere actually endov^^ed with the 
powers they assumed. By constantly dwelling 
upon one idea, of their own preternatural endow- 
ments, of spells, invocations, and diabolical 
assistance, they at last became as wicked in their 
own nature as the very devils, whom they fancied 
were obedient to their controul. 

Having said thus much upon the general 
practice and belief in witchcraft as it existed at 
the period of this narrative, the reader must 
now be introduced to one of its professors, who, 
like many of the tribe to which she belonged, 
was tinctured both with malice and with frenzy. 
She considered herself a being of the elements, 
and though a dweller upon earth, claimed affinity 
with the spirits of the deep, and the powers of 
the air. Ursula was an Italian by birth, and 
now resided in a small house of one of the 
obscure streets in Ghent, near the market-place, 
where, to her ordinary functions of fearful im- 
port^ as an interpreter of the stars, she added 



THE WHITE HOODS. 205 

some skill in the knowledge of herbs, medicinal 
compounds, and, though last, not least, oi poisons, 
a knowledge for which many of her country 
were so celebrated, that it is said they could 
administer a dose that should produce death at 
a certain and specific distance of time from the 
hour it was taken, either more or lessli ngering, 
agreeably to the wish of the destroyer — a pro- 
perty particularly assigned to that poison bearing 
the name of the aqna-tofana. 

It was to this woman's habitation Bianca now 
bent her steps, after the interview she had just 
had with the innocent and unoffending Anna. 
The apartment into which Bianca entered, was 
entirely suited to the profession of its occupant, 
and presented a combination of such objects as 
were calculated to impose awe upon the vulgar, 
and to awaken terror in the weak or timid mind. 
Bianca was of neither, and she entered the cabin 
of her ancient countrywoman with a firm step, 
and a haughty, though disturbed, mien. 

Yet the scene which she beheld was really 
calculated to raise at least disgust, if not alarm, 
in a female bosom less occupied than Bianca's 



206 THE WHITE HOODS. 

with its own tumultuous feelings. The room 
in which Ursula held her accustomed orgies, 
although spacious enough, received its light 
from a single casement, which was somewhat 
obscured by wreaths of yew and cypress that 
were partly suspended before it ; the apartment, 
therefore, at mid -day, partook of the gloom of 
night, so that, notwithstanding every thing could 
be seen within it, nothing was distinctly visible ; 
there was a dusky obscurity in which the imagi- 
nation might parcel out shapes and things agree- 
ably to the mood of horror with which the hag 
might be desirous to inspire her followers. 

Over the old oak chimney sat an owl, who, 
familiar with its mistress, would stoop its head 
towards her, as it roosted above, with its large 
eyes gUttering even through the darkness. By 
the side of this chimney hung a collection of 
bones, whilst a variety of skulls, an entire skele- 
ton, with a string of human hearts completely 
withered, a hand and arm wrapped in cere- 
cloths, with other strange combinations of fearful 
preparation, were hung around the apartment, 
to raise the awe and wonder of such unhappy or 



THE WHITE HOODS. 207 

shallow-witted persons as sought the witch within 
her unhallowed sanctuary. 

There was also a heterogeneous mixture, an 
unnatural alliance, of living creatures. The 
wolf-dog lay extended upon the hearth, and 
snarled and shewed his white fangs, as he raised 
his shaggy head to survey the stranger, ready to 
fly at his throat, should Ursula but give the 
sign. A rat, trained to be fearless of a large 
and fierce black cat, with which it was familiar, 
crept around the apartment ; an ape gambolled 
and gibbered around, as a raven flapped her 
wings in anger, and seemed desirous to break 
her chain to avenge herself on the intruder. 

At the time Bianca entered the apartment, it 
appeared that Ursula had been engaged in some 
of her mystic rites^ since the charmed circle was 
formed in the centre of the room. This con- 
sisted of a red line or circle marked upon the 
floor, with nothing placed upon it but a small 
glass case, in which were several living adders^ 
that made a hissing noise as they twisted and 
crawled about within their narrow prison. In 
the very centre of the circle was seen an ancient 



208 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Stone coffin, most probably the spoil of some 
ruined and pillaged church, during the former 
disturbances of Ghent, when many graves of the 
mitred abbots and opulent clergy were opened, 
in order to plunder their mouldering remains of 
the golden ornaments or jewels that had been 
placed about their vestments at the time of in- 
terment. A single torch burnt by the side of 
this coffin, and upon it was placed a white hood, 
and a bough of the yew tree. 

The ancient priestess of this unholy cell, with 
a wild and malicious expression in her counte- 
nance, stood, at the moment Bianca entered, 
with a book in one hand, and in the other she 
held a rod or wand, the usual appendage of her 
trade. This wand was twined about with the 
skin of a serpent, and finished at the top by the 
horn of a ram. Her gown was of black woollen, 
and from her girdle hung a pouch. It also 
exhibited, sti^ck within the belt, a knife, that, 
for form and size, would have suited as an instru- 
ment for the sacrifices of old. Her hair, thin 
and grey, hung in loose disorder down her 
back; and her dark and swarthy countenance, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 209 

lean and withered, possessed a character that 
seemed not of this earth, but of the lower world 
of guilt and terror. 

When Bianca entered this chamber of destiny 
and death, the hag fixed her eye upon her 
with a look of fierce delight, as she said, in a 
voice shrill and discordant^ " You are welcome, 
daughter, at the hour of a fearful rite." 

"^ And fearlessly is my mind prepared to meet 
it," replied Bianca. " Is your charm accepted ? 
or must I await your leisure ?" 

" The charm is accepted," said the witch ; 
'* but the white hood must rest on the coffin of 
the dead, till the torch is burnt out; then all is 
finished. What would you with me ?" 

" I come," answered Bianca, sternly, " not 
to reproach you, for well do I know that were 
vain. You would heed my railing as heeds the 
rock the chafing of the ocean that beats against 
its base. No ; I come not to reproach you, 
wretched woman, but to tell you that I fear you 
not, and, therefore, I will speak." 

" Your words are dark, Bianca," said the 
hag; " speak plainly, for the mother of the 

VOL, I. p 



210 THE WHITE HOODS. 

mystic spell, the sovereign of spirits and of 
elements, wastes not her moments in an idle 
bandy of words with a mortal creature." 

*^ You have broken faith with me," replied 
Bianca, as her brow darkened,, and angry feel- 
ings seemed to swell within her bosom. '^ You 
promised me revenge, a deep and ample revenge, 
for all my wrongs. You promised me that ruin 
and misery should fall upon the cause, and that 
a deadly hatred should succeed to the love which 
the Earl Lewis entertained for the daughter of 
John Lyon ; but you have broken faith." 

^« It is false !" said Ursula ; " it is most false ! 
Had the fiend who serves me so accused me, 
I would have held him bound in double tor- 
ments. Yes, I would have tortured by keeping 
him from the great work of mischief. Your 
revenge, and my desire for universal misery, 
thrives, prospers, and soon will fall upon all the 
wretched children of sin and clay who inhabit 
this detested city. The father and the daughter 
shall both become my victims." 

" It cannot be," replied Bianca. " The Earl 
is once more in pursuit of Anna — that detested 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 211 

woman, for whose sake Lewis discarded me. I 
saw her but this day, and upon her neck she 
wore one of those love*tokens the Earl is wont 
to bind about his favourites — a chain of gold. 
I know it to have been his. May the worst 
plagues that ever gnawed the heart of woman 
go with it ! Lewis loves Anna — seeks her ; 
she has accepted him ; it is plain, it must be so ; 
and all my dear-bought hopes of vengeance are 
no more. I shall live to see her succeed to that 
place in his affections, which was once held by 
the credulous, and now the discarded, Bianca." 

The hag replied to this complaint with a 
ghastly smile, and said, " Patience, daughter, 
patience — the work is not yet done." 

" Patience !" exclaimed Bianca, with fury in 
her looks, as she turned towards the aged sorce- 
ress. '•'^ Is it you, Ursula, you, who dare speak 
of patience? and to me! To you I owe my 
ruin. I was a girl when you came to our con- 
vent to teach your art of medicine. And what 
did you, but foster the discontents of the poor 
novice who longed to look upon that world 
fi-om which she was shut out ; you promised her 
p2 



212 THE WHITE HOODS. 

golden dreams of pride and happiness ; talked 
to her of her beauty, that might raise her to 
rank and honour; you persuaded her to steal 
from her convent, and with you." 

" And was not the golden dream of pride 
fulfilled?" replied Ursula. Bianca heeded not 
her interruption, but continued her complaint. 

" And what did you then ? Fearful of de- 
tection, you brought me from my native country, 
dazzled my young mind with visions of pleasure, 
placed me within the vortex of temptation, and 
gave me up a prey to vice and folly; you, 
Ursula, you did this ; you sold me to the Earl 
of Flanders." 

" I could not have done it," replied Ursula, 
" had not your own will helped to seal our 
compact." 

" Aye, there it is," said Bianca; " I loved 
Lewis ; I gave him all I had to give — heart, 
faith, fame, and affection, all were his ; for his 
sake I bore the insults of men, and the wrath of 
Heaven ; but while he loved me, I could bear it ; 
and he — he abandoned me — discarded me, for 
the sake of another, for the love of Anna. And 



THE WHITE HOODS. 213 

now think you, wretched woman, that I who 
hate, loathe, curse you as the foul author of all 
my misery ; think you, that I would bear with 
you but to gratify my revenge ? No ; I would 
have spurned your hellish arts; I would have 
plunged my dagger in your bosom, and sent 
you howling, unshriven, and without remorse, to 
him whose services you do on earth. / would 
have done this, but that I know your mind, 
dark as the grave, and wicked as the soul of him 
who dreamed of the first murder, delights in 
mischief; can look on an evil work, and, for its 
own sake, act it. For this I spare you, for this 
I use you, and for this I stoop to ally myself 
with such a thing, a loathsome thing, as you 
are." 

<^ Have you done," said the hag, " or will 
you ban me farther? I heed not your words, 
for you have been my victim. And the pangs 
you daily suffer, that hourly gnaw and rankle 
within your heart, till they shall consume the life 
blood, they may claim for you the allowance to 
curse, even before me. I can hear with in- 
difference the wordy mood of a weak woman. 
p3 



214 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Yet you owe me something, look at your attire ; 
that silk might robe a countess; who gave it 
you^ but your present paramom' ; and who 
made you known to him, to Von Artaveld, 
when the Earl discarded you ? — it was Ursula. 
Von Artaveld loves and protects you, else had 
you rotted in the very streets of Ghent, like a 
fallen and a worthless weed, torn from its bed 
and cast abroad, that every man who passes by 
might trample beneath his foot." 

" It is true," replied Bianca ; " but no thanks 
to thee ; but for the generous Von Artaveld, I 
must have perished^ or have become the most 
abandoned of my sex. Philip saved me from 
want ; he has been to me kind in affection, and 
could I but have brought him innocence for 
my dower, he would have married me. I 
cannot love Von Artaveld as I did my princely 
seducer, but I can serve him and honour him ; 
he has my gratitude. Nay, laugh not, wretched 
creature, it is true; but gratitude is a virtue 
that such a breast as thine can never know." 

" I laugh to hear you speak of any virtue," 
said Ursula : " vou, who thirst for blood and 



THE WHITE HOODS. 215 

misery. Leave this vain prating; and if you 
will have your desires satisfied, till your heart 
shall take its fill of vengeance, till your body 
shall be steeped in the red tide of human life 
up to your very ears^ hear me, and mark my 
words, for you must help the work of your own 
will." 

^' Speak, then," said Bianca; " I will not 
flinch to hear or to act. Give me but an ample 
vengeance for all my wrongs, and I will pardon 
your part in my ruin, and I will bid you draw 
your knife, which never yet was vainly drawn 
by you, and plunge it into my heart ; for re- 
venge once satisfied, life and I have no concern- 
ment with each other. I shall have no farther 
work to do on earth." 

'^ This is the proper spirit for my purpose," 
replied Ursula, exultingly. " Hear me, then. 
There is in this city a set of miscreants of men, 
who, desperate in their own fortunes and their 
hopes, would upset the present state of rule, 
would embroil their fellow-citizens in blood and 
outrage, to shape their own course, and raise 
their ambitious hopes upon the spoils of the 
p 4 



216 THE WHITE HOODS. 

general wreck. They have formed such a plot 
as shall consign to ruin, misery, and death, 
thousands of living souls. I have already paced 
the ground where their slaughtered bodies shall 
blacken, whilst they feed the ravens and the 
worm. I have trampled on the earth that lies 
ready to receive them ; and, in the foresight of 
that coming time, I have already thought that 
I could snuflP the smell of blood around me." 

i *^ And what have I to do with this?" en- 
quired Bianca. " In what new mischief am I 
required to act ?" 

" This plot," said Ursula, " if it goes on, 
will do your work of vengeance fully and com- 
pletely, upon John Lyon, his accursed daughter, 
and Lewis the betrayer. Will that pleasure 
you ?" 

'' Not the death of Lewis," replied Bianca, 
mournfully ; '^ I would not harm his life ; for 
although he has misused and abandoned me, I 
could not see him dead. Yet 1 would have him 
suffer in soul as I have suffered ; I would have 
him behold the new object of his love a mangled 
and disfigured corpse at his feet; I would pluck 



THE WHITE HOODS. 217 

him from his high place, and then leave him 
to obscurity and sorrow, a ruined fortune, and 
a worthless fame." 

" Thy vengeance is good, proud woman," 
said Ursula ; <' it is such as fiends devise, and 
triumph to enact. It spares the life for a time, 
to wring the soul with agony, like the exe- 
cutioner who tears limb by limb upon the rack^ 
before he gives the blow of grace and death. 
Thy purpose shall be satisfied. Now hear what 
part you have to play in this great work. The 
men of whom I spoke want some leader, whose 
name, whose talents, whose authority may in- 
fluence the better class of citizens to join in their 
deep plans. Philip Von Artaveld is the man 
upon whom all eyes are turned ; his very name 
is a spell, for his father, Jacob Von Artaveld, 
ruled like a king in Ghent, raised the opulence 
of the city, confirmed its franchises, and by his 
wisdom and his courage made Flanders ho- 
noured, respected, feared, that even the proud 
monarch, Edward the Third of England, sought 
his alliance and his friendship." 

" And the ungrateful citizens of Ghent," 



218 THE WHITE HOODS. 

replied Bianca, " requited Jacob for his pains 
as you would have had them ; for, in a moment 
of tumult and discontent, they murdered him ; 
and this cruel circumstance has made Philip, 
his son, wary how he deals with them, and 
hitherto he has shunned a public station." 

'' Aye/' said Ursula, '^ but Philip has a high, 
proud, and daring spirit, and could he but once 
be taught to hope that he might rise to the 
height his father had ascended to serve his 
country, he would not be backward to join in 
such a cause. I know the intention of these 
conspirators; they will endeavour to win him over 
to their plans. Do you in the interval work upon 
his mind with all your arts, lead him to expect 
the crown of success to his ambition, fan the 
embers of that hidden fire that lurks within his 
breast, into a living and a sudden flame, and all 
will prove successful. Von Artaveld once gained, 
thousands of our citizens will follow his example, 
and rise at once, for Lewis is little loved." 

" I will, I will do so," exclaimed Bianca; 
" I will use every means, every argument that 
may prevail, and I know his temper. He is 



THE WHITE HOODS. 219 

sudden and fiery, even as he is generous and 
brave ; we will succeed or perish." 

*« In the mean time," said Ursula, " I shall be 
busy with these men ; for all of them, more or 
less, seek me. Some, that I may foretell to 
them the future ; others, that I may aid them in 
the work. It is Ursula, too, who renders their 
mailed coats proof against the sword or axe, by 
the potency of her spells. It is Ursula who 
tempers the hard steel of their daggers point in 
poisons, that remain to fret and anger even to 
death the slightest wound they make. From 
various causes, all seek me, but most of all from 
fear ; lest, wanting my connivance, my sanction 
of their scheme, it should fail them ; for I am 
dreaded and fawned upon by the base herd, 
even as worldly princes are ; and like the great 
ones of the earth, I can use them and cast them 
off at pleasure." 

" And what are now your plans ?" enquired 
Bianca. 

^' You shall know all in time," said Ursula ; 
" for I shall need you. I have a device that 
shall stir up these men to madness; and the 



220 THE WHITE HOODS. 

curse that the Earl dared to vent on me shall 
fall upon his own head in awful retribution. 
Now begone, follow my instructions; be but 
patient, and the storm, though it gathers slowly, 
shall burst fearfully. Leave me for the present, 
for I have that to do which craves my utmost 
care ; go then, and may the fiend of discord 
be with your steps, and prosper your design. 
Look !" exclaimed Ursula, exultingly. ^« He 
hears me ! he awaits me ! the torch expires — 
the charm is complete — the White Hood, the 
White Hood, shall do his work and mine." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 221 



CHAP. XI. 

1 HE course of our narrative now obliges us to 
speak of the affairs of Ghent, and of those plots 
that had been so secretly and so artfully carried 
on by Peter du Bois, John Lyon^ Arnoul le 
Clerc, and other malcontents, who all, actuated 
by private views and passions, hoped to satisfy 
their revenge, to aid their ambition, or to raise 
their fortunes upon the subversion of the ex- 
isting state of government. 

A venerable chronicler of the time affords a 
most copious detail of these affairs. Here, 
therefore, it would be needless to attempt giving 
an account of them at large, since they will be 
found so amply stated in his own manner of 
prolix but interesting description. Still, how- 
ever, it is necessary that such a general view 
of the subject should be given, that the reader 
(if unacquainted with that minute historian) 



222 THE WHITE HOODS. 

may be able to comprehend the steps by which 
those important results were brought about that 
must hereafter be mentioned in these pages. 

For some time the conspirators carried on 
their meetings in the utmost privacy, and with 
the greatest caution; but as their party strength- 
ened they became less circumspect, and often 
openly assembled at the houses of each other, 
since a general discontent now prevailed, even 
amongst the more respectable and opulent class 
of the citizens. The Earl was impolitic, and, 
without himself designing to injure his " good 
town of Ghent," he allowed too much power to 
his officers and deputies, who abused it beyond 
whatever could have happened had Lewis de 
Male taken that active part in securing the 
public welfare which his station required of 
him. 

The deputation that had been sent from 
Ghent, to demand the freedom of its citizen, 
proved unsuccessful, and his detention was a 
breach of a most important franchise, which the 
citizens had always considered the security of 



THE WHITE HOODS. 

their general and individual liberty; for the Earl, 
instead of taking the affair into his own hands, 
contented himself with referring the deputation 
to his high bailiff of Ghent, Roger d'Auterme. 
The bailiff was, therefore, solicited to give free- 
dom to the citizen ; but he only answered, " If 
my prisoner were ten times as rich as the one I 
have in ward, I would never set him out of prison 
without an order from the Earl. I have powers 
to arrest, but none to set free." 

This answer, which in fact spoke but the 
truth, was busily circulated through Ghent with 
an evil intention by the conspirators, so that 
many of the chief citizens began to murmur, and 
to say it was a breach of their privileges that 
ought not to be suffered ; and that if this act 
should be allowed to pass, '* all the franchises 
of Ghent, which were so noble, would be lost." 

Another incident also occurred at this time to 
forward the views of the malcontents, and to stir 
up strife in the city. Ghent and Bruges had 
long contended in jealous rivalry, so that the 
slightest advantage granted to the one was 
viewed with an envious and suspicious eye by 



224 THE WHITE HOODS. 

the other ; and to such a height was this jealousy 
for pre-eminence carried, that the rival cities 
looked upon each other more as avowed enemies, 
than as the people of the same government and 
country. Bruges had risen to great opulence ; 
but there was one advantage which, notwith- 
standing all its riches, must ever have given 
the superiority to Ghent. This arose from the 
former city having neither river nor canals to 
facilitate its commerce ; whilst the latter enjoyed 
the benefit of numerous canals, and the rivers 
Scheld and Lis. 

To form such a canal as would afford Bruges 
the advantage of the river Lis, had long been 
the aim of its inhabitants. All were anxious for 
it; all would have contributed towards the 
necessary sums for executing the work with 
promptitude and effect, could they have but once 
secured the sanction of the Earl for such an 
undertaking, in order that it might be carried 
on, undisturbed by the jealous vigilance of the 
men of Ghent. 

But the citizens of Ghent were a fierce and a 
warlike body : Lewis feared them ; for too well 



THE WHITE HOODS. 225 

did he remember the latter times, when Jacob 
Von Artaveld had usurped the authority of the 
lawful prince in Flanders. He remained, there- 
fore, undecided, till the people of Bruges, by 
various intrigues, at length obtained from him 
the sanction necessary to carry on their work. 
The whole affair had been conducted with the 
utmost secrecy and caution ; still vague reports ' 
of it were whispered abroad, and made another 
subject of complaint by the malcontents, who 
aimed at nothing more earnestly than so to embroil 
the town of Ghent with the Earl and the people 
of Bruges, that a general insurrection of the 
citizens would be the consequence. 

Another great cause of dissatisfaction arose 
from the power of Gilbert Matthew and his 
brothers, who, it was openly said, sold at their 
own price all the offices and places in the state, 
and filled their pockets with bribes, ere they 
would allow any suit to find its way to the 
Earl. 

The tax that had been laid upon the pilots 

and foreign merchants was found so grievous, 

that many of the latter talked of giving up their 

VOL. I. 2 



226 THE WHITE HOODS. 

commerce with Ghent — a thing which threatened 
ruin to that city ; so that it was now pubHcly 
said every franchise would be worth nothing, 
unless some one stood boldly forward in their 
support. Thus did the discontents of the people 
gradually spread through the city, to the great 
joy of the more artful insurgents, whose least 
wish was to see these grievances corrected, lest 
peace^ instead of rebellion, should ensue. 

The Earl, who sometimes visited Bruges and 
Lille, was artfully kept in ignorance of much 
that had become a subject of complaint, and 
although he heard that a disaffected party 
actually existed in Ghent^ yet he was deceived 
as to its number and extent^ and was made to 
think it could be at any time easily put down, 
should there arise a serious cause to sanction 
the exertion of his own power. It appears, from 
the train of events which occurred, that the Earl 
was really the most aggrieved person, although 
he cannot escape the charge of negligence in the 
first instance, nor did he resort to any violent 
measures, till compelled to do so by the conduct 
of the people of Ghent. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 2S7 

Such was the state of things at that period. 
We now resume the thread of our narrative. 
The leaders of the malcontents were anxious to 
obtain all the support they could from persons 
of the more opulent classes, since the greater 
part of their avowed followers consisted of the 
most worthless of the people. Peter du Bois, 
whose sagacity and cunning enabled him to look 
beyond the present time, felt anxious to attach 
to his interest some citizen, who might act as a 
chief in the rebellion, whose influence was power- 
ful with his compeers, and upon whom Du Bois 
might throw the odium of any measures that 
might hereafter fail, without the danger of Peter 
himself suffering in the opinion of his own party, 
since whatever he should suggest, he must still be 
but a second, and not a principal in the measure, 
— the responsibility would" rest with another. 

Guided by this artful policy, he resolved to 
make a bold attempt to engage Philip Von 
Artaveld in the cause. He knew, by means of 
his agent Ursula, that Philip's mind had been 
worked upon by Bianca, and that it needed but 
S2 



228 THE WHITE HOODS. 

some sudden and striking circumstance to make 
the thoughtless but bold Von Artaveld declare 
himself of the insurgent party. " I must win 
him at once," said Du Bois to Ursula ; '* he 
must not be allowed time for deliberate reflec- 
tion ; and if you execute your plan adroitly, he 
will become ours without the possibility of 
recantation." Ursula assured Du Bois that she 
was prepared, and waited but tlie proper hour 
to act with effect, when i •; only Von Artaveld, 
but thousands of the disaffected, she had no 
doubt, would rise in open rebellion. 

The malcontents had arranged that every 
thing necessary should be ready, to enable them 
to declare publicly their purpose at the approach- 
ing festival of archery. This was yearly held in 
the neighbourhood of Ghent, since no city in 
Europe was more famed for the skill of its 
archers, either in the cross or long bow ; and it 
had long been foreseen that the occasion of 
the festival would give the malcontents a fair 
opportunity for uniting themselves into armed 
bands, under pretext of being thus assembled 



THE WHITE HOODS. 229 

to practise with warlike weapons, merely for 
their sport. 

All was now prepared, yet with so much care, 
silence, and precaution, that the dangerous plots 
which threatened ruin to the Earl and his ad- 
herents might be compared to a secret mine of 
gunpowder, which lies still, but ready — unsus- 
pected, yet certain — and which explodes with a 
terrible convulsion on the slightest spark being 
set to the train. On this occasion it was Peter 
du Bois who had laid that train, and Ursula, his 
infamous agent and accomplice, held the match 
ready in her hand. In what manner she used 
the lighted brand will hereafter appear. 

Actuated by the motives before named, Peter 
du Bois, on the morning of the festival, waited 
upon Philip Von Artaveld, (having previously 
seen Bianca at the house of Ursula, where all 
things were settled between them,) in order to 
make that last and bold attempt, so long medi- 
tated. Philip entered the room, where Du Bois 
awaited him, examining a long bow which he 
held in his hand, and gaily singing a stanza of 
an old Flemish ballad, not unlike our own ballads 
S3 



230 THE WHITE HOODS. 

in celebration of the archery of " Merry Sher- 
wood." 

" The bowman bent his bow so strong. 

And aimed him at the clout ; 
Swift flew the arrow, straight and long. 
While all the people shout. 

" The clout is struck, the prize is won. 

So true the shaft was sent ; 
Oh ! well has your good bowman done. 

Ye merry men of Ghent." 

Philip Von Artaveld, wlio carolled this old 
air with as light a heart as ever beat within the 
bosom of a thoughtless young man, was of a tall 
and comely person. His countenance^ frank 
and open, expressive of a gay and anilnated 
temper, still possessed the stamp of superior 
intellect. The forehead was high, and the brow 
projecting ; and the eyes would flash fire when- 
ever his feelings were aroused by any high-minded 
purpose or discom'se. Philip greeted Peter du 
Bois as one young man greets another with 
whom he is on a familiar footing, without cere- 
mony or observance, and proceeded to speak on 
the topic of the day, the festival of archery. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 231 

" We shall have brave sport," said Von 
Artaveld. " The knights of St. Sebastian 
against the knights of St. George; Ghent against 
all Flanders ; not a man of them but has prac- 
tised, and brought down, his bird." 

" There is other and more worthy game," 
replied Du Bois, " for men like you and me, 
Von Artaveld. Before you repair to the field, 
I would seriously speak with you." 

*^ M^hat, to-day ?" said Philip. '« In sooth, I 
was never less in the mood for any thing but the 
flight of a grey goose wing. Only look abroad, 
Du Bois. See what weather we have; not a 
breath of air stirs to swerve an arrow from its 
aim. And see what a quiver I have, of the right 
true kind. The shafts all of ash, fine, smooth, 
and taper ; the heads pointed to a hair ; and 
every feather plucked the second of a choice 
grey goose pinion. Of all fletchers, give me 
Hans Van Eche ; he is the man to make you an 
arrow to hit the clout at four hundred yards. 
I have," continued the gay PhiHp, as he shewed 
I>u Bois his bow, with an air of uncommon 
interest and satisfaction, '^ I have, too, as fine a 
2 4 



232 THE WHITE HOODS. 

long bow as even an English archer could desire ; 
aye, and a cross bow besides, fit for a Genoese 
count. The prizes to-day are a gold medallion, 
a flagon of silver chased at Antwerp, with an 
arrow of the like material, headed with gold. 
And if an eye like a hawk, and a hand dextrous 
and steady, can win a prize to give to thee, 
Bianca, Von Artaveld will this day gain it." 

" I doubt not your skill," replied Bianca, " to 
win any prize you think worth the attempt, 
were it of the highest order." 

*' You are a little flatterer," said Von Arta- 
veld, as he smiled, and looked pleased, upon 
Bianca ; " but I will do my best. Are you for 
the sports, Peter du Bois, or do you mean to 
sit there all this goodly day, looking like a man 
under penance, when there are young gallants, 
strong bows, an open field, and fair eyes to wit- 
ness the contest and the prize." 

" I am for the field," replied Du Bois, " but 
not for such sports as yours, Philip. But I pray 
you give me but a short audience ere you depart '; 
I have matter of moment for your ear." 

"No doubt," said Von Artaveld, '' some of 



THE WHITE HOODS. 233 

your crazy schemes to root out old grievances, 
in order to bring in new ones ; but I will hear 
you. Bianca, how does this jerkin look? It is 
made after the true fashion of a knight of 
St. Sebastian — a bright green cloth, close and 
trim, and the quiver hung right athwart the 
back, that scholars may think upon a Cupid 
when they see it. The cap smart, swaggering, 
and debonair; the bracer well set, and every 
tassel as it should be. Are the ?" 

" I conjure you, Philip," said Peter, " give up 
this vain mood, and hear me : let us talk like men." 

'^' Why, so we do," replied Von Artaveld, 
" when we speak of those braveries that chiefly 
delight women. Your archer is nothing, unless 
he is set in full trim to catch a bright eye, and 
to win a soft heart. This bow is well bent," 
he continued, again examining it, " and the 
string of double-twisted silk, and the nock in 
every arrow bound over with the same." And 
then Von Artaveld raised his bow, drew the 
string close up to his ear, and let it smartly loose, 
as he sang again, 

" The clout is struck, the prize is won," &c. 



234 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" Bianca, fairest," he added^ " you will be in 
the field, and my bow shall make you the mis- 
tress of the revels, for I am determined to win a 
prize." 

'' Aye, and a great one it shall be," answered 
Bianca. " Philip, I conjure you to be serious, 
and hear Du Bois ; time presses, and you must 
soon be gone. You know what I have already 
urged; hear Du Bois, then, I beseech you." 

" I will, Bianca, I \^Tll," replied Von Arta- 
veld, " so Peter will but leave that abominable, 
snarling, doleful look of his, and speak like a 
gentle squire of dames, and not with that croak- 
ing tone, like some grieved monk who solicits 
my lord abbot to eat butter during lent, lest oil 
should turn upon his stomach." 

" Nay, but hear him seriously," said Bianca ; 
" you know not of how much importance may 
be this one hour." 

" I will hear him, then, with perfect gravity," 
replied Von Artaveld, " to pleasure you, sweet ; 
and rather than such a sad brow should appear 
on the face of my Bianca, I would be serious 
as death." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 235 

" Aye, it is of death I would speak," said 
Du Bois — " the death of our liberty. This day 
is to seal the ruin of our ancient franchises. You 
know what is already done; and in order to 
prevent the possibility of the citizens guarding 
their own rights, this festival is to be the last of 
our archery ; for henceforth no man is to be 
allowed to carry arms without a licence from 
the court. It is shrewdly suspected that we are 
indebted to Gilbert Matthew for the suggestion 
of this measure." 

At these words Von Artaveld started as from 
a dream : all levity in a moment forsook his 
countenance^ and he seemed another creature ; 
for his follies were those of temper, they had no 
connection with his understanding. His mind, 
on the contrary, improved by education and a 
habit of thinking for himself, (which he really 
possessed, notwithstanding his light mood,) pro- 
mised a character far beyond the ordinary race 
of men, and one that emulated the energies of 
his celebrated and deceased father. 

" This would be indeed the death of liberty," 
answered Von Artaveld; «' and it is such a 



236 THE WHITE HOODS. 

shameless innovation of our dearest rights as 
citizens, that every man, aye, every boy in 
Ghent, who can but draw a bow-string, will let 
fly an arrow, with a curse for its impetus, at the 
head of Gilbert Matthew, rather than yield to 
such dishonour. What ! are we slaves ? are we 
beasts? that we must have our claws cut, lest 
they should tear our masters, who worry, mis- 
use, oppress us — and all in very wantonness. 
I will join you." 

'' Nay, now you are over-hasty," said Du 
Bois. " Hear first what I would say, and then 
choose your own course; we, the aggrieved 
citizens of Ghent, at this moment want a leader 
— one whose name shall rouse all hearts to 
follow him; and your name, Philip, is Von 
Artaveld ! Your father's spirit shall once more 
breathe in you. It shall awake the slumbering 
energies of this oppressed city — it shall stir up 
our very children to resistance, so you will but 
bear our banner, and call upon all men to save 
their sinking country." 

" I will," exclaimed Von Artaveld, with en- 
thusiasm ; '« I will swear to do it. Ghent, my 



THE WHITE HOODS. 237 

birth-place, the nurse of my father's honour, 
and the sad witness of his murder — Ghent 
shall find that his son lives to revenge his death. 
What would you more, Du Bois ? You look as 
if still dissatisfied. Call me to a purpose of 
energy — to one of noble bearing — the public 
good our aim, with no dark passions and selfish 
views to debase it : call me to this, and say, if 
Philip would not freely sacrifice his life in the 
cause, that he is unworthy the name of Von 
Artaveld." 

" You will add yet a greater glory to that 
name," replied Peter, '^ and I am satisfied. I 
have heard men say, that when an infant you 
were carried to the church of St. Peter's in 
Ghent to be baptized; that there the good Queen 
Philippa, consort of Edward of England, stood 
sponsor to you at the font ; and in compliment 
to her you received the name by which you are 
a Christian. I have heard, too, that whilst the 
royal matron held you in her arms, you wept as 
you looked up at the priest; but when Sir 
Walter Woodland, to soothe you after a soldier's 
fashion, held up the handle of his bright sword, 



238 THE WHITE HOODS. 

you caught at it and laughed, and King Edward 
swore ' by God's teeth, the boy would prove a 
lusty soldier.'' You shall fulfil the royal pro- 
phecy — you shall be our leader. The craft of 
a chief may soon be learned, if you will but listen 
to my advice — to my counsels." 

'^ I need them not," said Philip, impatiently. 
" 1 see the whole plan — it is to hold ourselves 
in arms till we have obtained a redress of our 
grievances, and a restoration of our franchises. 
And if this is denied to us, to resist even to the 
death. To remove from our lord^ the Earl of 
Flanders, all his base favourites, and to give 
him, with a set of new counsellors, a lesson how 
to behave towards his citizens in time to come." 

'' Nay, this is not all," replied Du Bois; 
" you must learn how to govern the base multi- 
tude you will lead on to t}\e work. No levity, 
no follies — all should be stern and ruthless. 
The mob must be ruled by fear ; can you be 
cruel and proud ? for you will have to deal with 
those who, like beasts of burthen, must be 
driven with the goad. To render docile the 
senseless herd, you must be their master as well 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 239 

as their leader ; often renowned for cruelty, but 
never suspected of weakness — such weakness as 
men call mercy. It is thus our Flemish swine 
must be ruled ; and the life of a man should be 
no more valued than the swallow or the lark that 
we slay for the spit." 

" By my troth," answered Philip, "should 
I need a tutor, you, Peter^ will prove one of a 
most ready eloquence, to teach me the law of 
ruling. However, all shall go well ; I will teach 
the rascal mob to follow at my heels, as dogs 
attend their master, or I will whip, hang, and 
slay to thy hearts content. Oh, that I had but thy 
countenance, Peter du Bois, to begin this trade 
with ; it would save a hangman's fees, and kill 
the varlets with the poison of a most villainous 
aspect. Come, shall we forward to the field ? 
I know thy friends, Peter, will be there. I am 
prepared. Ghent shall have her freedom, or I 
will find a grave. Farewell^ Bianca ; you will 
be a witness of our sports. Stay, Peter, I had 
forgot my new green mantle ; it is curiously cut 
of the last French fashion, and falls gracefully 
as I loose a shaft." 



240 THE WHITE HOODS. 

And thus, in a strange and mixed mood of 
extreme levity of manner, yet serious purpose of 
action, Von Artaveld set off with Du Bois to 
join the archers. Bianca, who, since her inter- 
view with Ursula, had daily worked on his 
mind to induce him to become a rebel, now 
hastened to inform the sorceress of her success. 
Ursula resolved that the brand thus lighted 
should not be suffered to expire. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 241 



CHAP. XII. 

When Philip Von Artaveld and Peter du 
Bois left the house of the former^ to join the 
bands of archers who were preparing to set out 
on their way towards the fields in which the 
sports were held, they found the whole town 
in commotion, and all the people eagerly 
pressing forward, with that hilarity of spirit 
which public exhibitions of this kind seldom fail 
to excite. 

The place appointed for the trial of skill in 
the cross and long bow, was a large plain near 
Ghent, which commanded a full view of the 
city, surrounded by its massive walls, and rising 
above them in clustered towers and spires. The 
rivers Scheldt and Lis rolled silently on, reflect- 
ing in their clear surface the passing cloud, or 
here and there disturbed by the stately march of 
some vessel of burthen, or by the light ripple of 
the feathering oar, as the boats passed busily 

VOL. I. K 



242 THE WHITE HOODS. 

along, freighted with the gallant concourse of 
the young and the gay. 

The usual tumult of a great commercial city 
seemed this day to have sunk into repose, as the 
gates of Ghent appeared to have poured out her 
inhabitants in one torrent towards the plain. 
All the companies of the different trades, headed 
by their masters and deacons, walked in proces- 
sion ; and Gilbert Matthew and his brothers 
(who, at an early hour, had stationed themselves 
in different parts to observe what was going for- 
ward,) saw with dismay that nearly all these men 
were armed — a thing the more extraordinary 
on account of their being chiefly mechanics, who 
were seldom known to accustom themselves to 
the use of any weapon. Gilbert immediately 
sent intelligence of this circumstance to Lewis 
de Male, and begged him to abstain from the 
sports, lest these symptoms of preparation for 
assault should augur danger to his person; for as 
Gilbert depended entirely upon the Earl for 
the continuance of his own prosperity, he was 
cautious to keep all danger as far as possible 
from the person of his prince. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 243 

A mound of earth, upon which was elevated 
a sort of platform of wood, stood in the centre 
of the plain^ and upon this platform a shaft was 
also elevated, by some skilfully adjusted scaffold- 
ing, to a height equal to that of the steeple of 
the cathedral. Upon the very top of this shaft 
was affixed a bird, carved in wood, to transfix 
which was to gain the chief prize of the day. 
The mound was also covered with various other 
shafts; these were lower in height than that 
already mentioned, but each had a wooden bird 
fixed at the top^ and each was to confer some 
prize upon the archer who struck it. 

On the opposite side of the plain, near the 
spot where the archers took their stand, appeared 
three pavilions, or tents, of crimson silk, em- 
broidered and fringed with gold, bearing on their 
fronts the arms of Flanders (a sable lion langue 
d'or,) richly worked upon a ground of blue and 
silver. Within the centre pavilion was placed^ 
under a canopy, the chief prizes of the day — 
a gold medallion, a silver flagon, and an arrow 
of the same metal. The tent was left open in 
front, that these prizes should be seen by the 
r2 



244 THE WHITE HOODS. 

people. The other two pavilions contained the 
minor prizes, such as small medallions, bows 
and arrows^ &c. All these tents were appro- 
priated to the use of the Earl of Flanders, his 
principal attendants, and his court ; but on this 
day, in consequence of the information received 
from Gilbert Matthew, neither the Earl nor his 
chief courtiers appeared, a circumstance that 
added to the universal discontent of the asforrieved 
party ; since, ripe to take offence from every 
occurrence, they construed it into a mistrust of 
their good faith, and an indifference shewn 
towards their skill in arms, and their amuse- 
ments. 

Near the tents spacious galleries had been 
constructed. These were gaily decorated with 
tapestry of the finest work ; for the looms of 
Flanders, at the period of our narrative, were 
unrivalled in the beauty and excellence of their 
manufacture. Below the galleries, the heralds, 
the minstrels, and the trumpeters, took their 
stand. And at intervals, between the occupation 
of the sports, the minstrels played lively airs — 
whilst the trumpets alone announced the appear- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 245 

ance of a new candidate for the prize, and blew 
the shout of triumph whenever his aim was 
crowned with success. 

The galleries were filled with ladies, dressed 
in all the costly and gorgeous attire the wives 
and daughters of the wealthy citizens of Ghent 
were so fond of displaying. Jewels and gold 
hung as thickly about their heads, their arms, 
and necks, as icicles hang sparkling about the 
boughs upon a frosty morning. On the back 
rows of the galleries were seated those citizens 
who, by age, or inaptitude to martial sports, 
were rendered unfit to share actively in the 
amusements of the day. These citizens were 
now present merely as spectators; and whilst 
they looked upon the gay throng assembled 
around_5 many an eye of pride did they cast upon 
the banner of their own city, which, formed of 
silk, and embroidered entirely with gold and 
pearls, hung streaming in the air above their 
heads. 

With the conspirators, this day was marked 
as one of fearful import. They had been inde- 
fatigable in the arrangement of their plans. 
R 3 



246 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Day and night had the leaders toiled in their 
exertions ; and a general understanding, a gene- 
ral agreement, had taken place, that upon this 
day they would strike the blow; upon this day 
they would rouse all hearts, and animate all 
feelings, to procure the redress of their griev- 
ances, and the subversion of the present state of 
things : so that many who had hitherto continued 
neuter, or only wavering between submission 
or insurrection, should, in spite of themselves, 
be forced to take some active part. 

Such was the concerted plot, yet it was far- 
ther arranged, that, if possible, no blood was 
on this day to be shed ; a contest was not to 
take place by way of arms, till intimidation had 
failed of success, or till the more wealthy 
burghers had so mixed themselves up with the 
acts of the malcontents, that they should be 
driven on to desperate measures for their own 
security. These plans had been digested and 
agreed to by all the chief insurgents, and the 
more willingly, as it was thought prudent not 
violently to shock, at the first onset, the feelings 
of the more moderate and merciful of their party. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 247 

John Lyon^ Peter du Bois, Arnoul le Clerc, 
La Nuitee, and other leaders, had directed their 
several parties to come into the field in armed 
companies, by hundreds, and fifties together. 
All the mechanics of the different trades, who 
had any share in the general discontent, were 
also privately directed to come armed, some on 
pretence of the field sports, but far the greater 
number as men who resolved to adhere to their 
old franchises, and to wear arms whenever they 
thought proper to do so, for their own defence. 

These orders were punctually obeyed ; and 
Gilbert Matthew and his brothers, notwith- 
standing they knew of discontented parties in 
the city, till now had no idea of their number 
and extent, when they appeared at once pub- 
licly, and with a gravity and resolution imprinted 
on each countenance, sufficient to alarm the 
deacon and his friends. The brothers looked 
with dismay upon each other, yet, conscious that 
if any ill were particularly aimed against them- 
selveSj flight would now be vain, since the field 
was covered on all sides with these people, they 
resolved to dissemble all suspicion, and to act 
R 4 



248 THE WHITE HOODS. 

with the frankness of men who rely upon the 
good faith of their neighbours, trusting that 
neither the Earl nor the court would venture 
unprepared into a scene that threatened so much 
danger. The dark and angry appearance that 
surrounded them might indeed be compared to 
a mass of black and heavy thunder clouds^ which, 
although not a drop of rain falls, nor a sound is 
heard to whisper around to disturb the air, yet 
threatens every moment a violent combustion. 

Such was the state of things when the young 
men forming the two chosen bands of archers, 
called^ by way of distinction^ the Knights of 
St. George, and of St. Sebastian, entered the 
plain, in order to form into a regular line on 
either side of the pavilions. The knights of 
St. George (so called, originally, after the tute- 
lary saint of England, as a compliment to 
Edward the Third during the time he visited 
Ghent,) were gaily attired in bright scarlet 
cloth, each man wearing a plume of white fea- 
thers in his archer's cap, and having around his 
neck a gold chain and medallion ; upon the latter 
the battle of the saint with the dragon was 



THE WHITE HOODS. 249 

represented in high relief. Their quivers, gaily 
covered with embroidered silk, hung upon their 
shoulders ; and each bore a long or a cross bow 
(according to liis skill in either weapon) in his 
hand. The herald of the band walked before 
them, displaying their embroidered banner, and 
followed by minstrels and trumpets, that made 
all the plain ring with their loud harmony. 

The knights of St. Sebastian were attired in 
green, and wore also a medallion, with their 
saint represented upon it, transfixed with arrows. 
This band was headed by Philip Von Artaveld, 
whose high and martial spirit, and excellence in 
arms, had rendered him exceedingly popular 
with all the young men of Ghent. 

It may well be supposed that the appearance 
of two such companies of archers, all picked 
and chosen for their skill and agility, the very 
flower of the youth of the city, was calculated to 
produce a feeling of universal interest, as they 
marched forward, their looks animated with the 
fervour of hope and emulation, and their steps 
measured to the sounds of music. 

Yet on the present occasion, there was such 



250 THE WHITE HOODS. 

an universal chill, such a feeling of general 
interest of a more vital character, such a sense 
of suppressed expectation, that had been excited 
in the bosoms of all present by the formidable 
appearance of the armed bodies, headed by the 
conspirators, that the sports seemed to be scarcely 
a matter of interest ; and the shouts of universal 
greeting, which at any other period would have 
shook the vault of Heaven, as these gallant bands 
appeared, now burst but partially forth, and 
soon died away in low murmurs. ^' It is well 
it should be so," said Peter du Bois to Von 
Artaveld, who noticed this want of the usual 
acclamations. " Since this is to be the last 
festival of archery, since our sports are to be put 
down, till it pleases the court to give us leave 
again to draw a bow, we ought not to expect 
rejoicing and acclamations over our expiring 
honour ; and this day is marked for the death of 
our archery." 

*' It shall be first marked with my own death," 
replied Von Artaveld, in a whisper, to Du Bois ; 
" I can bear much as a citizen, rather than dis- 
turb public tranquillity, but there is a point 



THE WHITE HOODS. 251 

beyond which no man ought to use forbearance. 
We will never tamely witness the death of our 
franchises, one by one, till we have lost them all, 
and are reduced to slaves. But come — our men 
prepare for the sports ; if this is to be the last 
of them^ at least we will shew, that if they allow 
us not the bird for the bolt, we know how to 
aim surely^ and at better marks, if they provoke 
us." 

The young men now severally stood forward 
to display their skill in archery. These princi- 
pally consisted of the knights of St. George and 
St. Sebastian, but others, not belonging to either 
party, were allowed to mingle with the sports, 
and to loose a shaft, although few availed them- 
selves of the indulgence, since all the most skilful 
had enrolled themselves in one or other of these 
celebrated bands ; and it was rarely seen that 
any youth had the hardihood, or the skilly to 
venture rivalry with such practised bowmen. 
So excellent, indeed, was their skilly that scarcely 
was there an archer of St. George, or St. Sebas- 
tian, but he struck a bird on the lower shafts, 
for the highest was yet unattempted ; and though 



252 THE WHITE HOODS. 

all would have rejoiced to strike it, and thus to 
gain the chief prize^ yet the fear of failure 
deterred many from the attempt, so that the 
contest seemed reserved for a few of the most 
experienced on either side. 

To strike the bird fixed on the highest shaft 
was an honour that conferred upon the success- 
ful candidate the rank of master of the festival ; 
and he was treated with a deference due to a 
victor during the rest of the day, heading the 
procession on its return to Ghent, and offering 
up public thanks for his success at the high altar 
of St. Bavon, where he heard mass, and paid 
his duty, attended by all the archers of the dif- 
ferent companies, before he proceeded to the 
town-hall, to receive the prize, which was pub- 
licly conferred upon him, accompanied with the 
most interesting ceremonies. These were cir- 
cumstances of honour sufficient to raise emulation 
in every youthful breast, and had greatly contri- 
buted towards that eager desire for excellence in 
archery, which so much distinguished the young 
men of Ghent. 

Peter du Bois now took his station to try for 



THE WHITE HOODS. 253 

the first prize, and' the trumpet sounded as he 
prepared to shoot. Peter slowly and deliberately 
aimed at the mark before him, held the arrow 
some time in his hand when drawn to the head, 
and let it hang upon the bow-string before it 
made its swift flight through the air. The shaft 
failed of striking the bird, yet it passed within a 
quarter of a yard's breadth of the mark. No 
trumpet sounded, for Peter was unsuccessful. 

^' Come," said Von Artaveld, '' now give 
place to me. That shaft failed because you 
looked at the head of the arrow instead of the 
mark, when you took your aim. I will teach 
you better, Peter." 

^« Stay, Philip Von Artaveld," exclaimed a 
citizen, who acted as marshal of the bowmen, 
" stay, you must not loose a shaft yet, since 
your superiors are come into the field. Here is 
Sir Walter d'Anghien, and two or three others 
of the court ; they are this moment arrived^ and 
would try their fortunes. Let them shoot first." 

'^ They shall not, by St. Sebastian, whose 
badge I wear ; they shall not," cried the youth, 
with much warmth. « They are late comers; 



254 THE WHITE HOODS. 

and better would it be had they not come at all^ 
since their lord^ the Earl of Flanders, disdains 
us and our sports. He does not visit the field, 
and why should any of his court step in^ and 
think to carry off the prize from us who are 
citizens, and despised by them ? It is my turn 
to loose an arrow; and, by all the saints of 
Heaven, if any one dares to intercept my right, 
the shaft shall have other aim than yonder 
bird." 

So saying, Von Artaveld lost not a moment to 
make good his claim ; he instantly stept forward, 
stood firmly and uprightly, raised the bow^ fixed 
the shaft, and then drew the bow-string quite up 
to his ear, and the arrow to its head, looked for 
a moment stedfastly at the mark, and smartly 
letting slip the shaft, by withdrawing his 
fingers, it whizzed through the air with such 
velocity that the eye could not keep pace with 
its flighty struck the bird, and remained fixed in 
the mark. The trumpet instantly sounded, and 
loud and reiterated shouts from the knights of 
St. Sebastian proclaimed the triumph of their 
party. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 255 

Sir Walter d'Anghien, a fine young man, 
who was both the nephew and the ward of the 
Earl of Flanders, now advanced, desirous to 
take some share in the sports, and to loose a 
shaft. But murmurs arose on every side as he 
approached, not from any personal enmity 
towards himself, for he was yet scarcely known 
to the people of Ghent, but the circumstance of 
his belonging to the courts and his near kindred 
to the Earl, at this moment rendered him 
obnoxious to the people ; who^ glad of an oppor- 
tunity to shew how much they resented the sup- 
posed affront Lewis de Male had put upon 
them, by absenting himself from the sports, now 
were unanimous in treating with contempt one 
of the EarFs family and court. 

The leaders of the disaffected bands observed 
this with secret exultation^ and they hailed the 
murmurs of disrespect vented agaiiist Sir Walter 
d'Anghien as the proper signal to begin their 
intended disturbance. Peter du Bois hastened 
to join John Lyon, and whispered to him, 
^« Now, now, let us forward to the work — all is 
ready — our men will join the cry, and this field 



256 THE WHITE HOODS. 

of sports we will turn to one of confusion. Re- 
member the charge we are to make against the 
court; Sir Walter is here — let us begin by 
turning the tide of wrath against him." 

" Forward then," answered John Lyon ; " all 
is indeed prepared, and our measures will take 
every one by surprise — they will intimidate 
our enemies; for after what we have already 
done, we must drive it on to extremities. Peace, 
however sealed, would spare neither your head 
nor mine, Peter ; we have done too much for that 
already." 

" On, then, in the deviPs name," said Du 
Bois ; and turning to his own band, he con- 
tinued, " Follow me, my masters, for you all 
know I lead you on that you may all find 
justice." Without farther parley, he snatched 
up a bugle that hung at his breast, blew thrice a 
shrill blast, which was echoed and answered in 
like manner by the bugles of all the captains 
and leaders of the insurgents. This was the 
signal, and in a few minutes all their bands 
rushed forward. " Seize them, seize Sir Walter 
d'Anghien and the Matdiews," exclaimed Du 



THE WHITE HOODS. 257 

Bois; ^' they come, my fellow-citizens, deputed 
by the Earl of Flanders, to put down your 
ancient sports — to proclaim that henceforth no 
man of Ghent shall carry arms, even for his own 
defence, save by a licence from the court. Will 
you suffer this? Will you thus tamely yield 
franchise after franchise, till your liberties are 
lost for ever ?" 

" Never, never," shouted a thousand voices at 
once ; "we will have our franchises — we will 
be righted." ^'^ Down with the Matthews ; no 
innovations." " Restore our citizen; we will 
have him from the Earl's prison." " We will 
have our rights." " We will avenge our wrongs." 
These and a thousand other tumultuous shouts 
burst from all sides at once. 

The leaders of the insurgents each addressed 
various companies of the citizens^ in different 
parts of the field, stirring up their minds to vio- 
lence and rebellion. Sir Walter d'Anghien, 
his companions, and the Matthews^ were sud- 
denly assaulted by Du Bois's band ; and seeing 
how vain would be all opposition against such 

VOL. I. s 



258 THE WHITE HOODS. 

numbers, they could do nothing but submit in 
silence. 

In the mean time^ John Lyon, Arnoul le 
Clerc, and others, hastened from place to place 
in the field, using every argument to inflame the 
minds of the people; and especially setting 
before them, in the worst light, ^the breach of 
their liberties, by the Earl's detaining in prison 
one of their own citizens. Sir Simon de Bete, 
an act contrary to law, unless sanctioned by their 
own warrant. The purposed suppression of the 
sports, the impost on the pilots, the tax on the 
navigation of the Scheldt, with every cause of 
offence, real or supposed, was at this moment 
brought forward to stir up the assembled multi- 
tude to open rebellion. 

The train had been already long prepared, 
and now that the match was laid to it, the fire 
ran swiftly through the whole line, and exploded 
in a violent and general conflagration; for 
such a train had been the machinations of the 
artful Du Bois. The citizens shouted for 
redress, they hailed the leaders of the insurgents 
6 



THE WHITE HOODS. 259 

with heart and soul, some shook them by the 
hand, others greeted them as the deliverers of 
their country, all were unanimous in support of 
their cause. The mob joined the general cry. 
The different trades rallied round their banners, 
and as they waved backwards and forwards in 
the air, declared their willingness to die under 
them, or to regain their rights. The mariners 
and pilots hailed their old deacon, and once 
more declared for John Lyon^ avowing they 
would no longer pay imposts to Gilbert Matthew 
or his brethren. 

To describe the universal tumult^ which at 
this moment prevailed^ throughout an extensive 
plain where thousands were assembled, would 
be impossible : it had now risen to such a height 
that every one spoke or shouted, whilst no one 
listened ; and a mingled uproar of sounds, that 
resembled a chaos of noise from violent spirits, 
broke loose from the depths of perdition, and 
contending for the mastery, alone indicated that 
the purpose of insurrection was now universal. 

In vain did the leaders endeavour to procure 
silence to address the people, till Peter du Bois, 
s 2 



260 THE WHITE HOODS. 

after shouting till he was hoarse, alternately 
begging and commanding attention, at length so 
far succeeded as to be able to make the citizens 
and insurgents comprehend, that whatever mea- 
sures they might wish to adopt, it was absolutely 
necessary they should first begin by the election 
of a chief, who would guide them on with 
courage and wisdom to recover their franchises 
and establish their liberty. 

Scarcely had he done speaking, when a voice, 
elevated with passion, loud and discordant in its 
tones, burst from the multitude, crying, '^ A 
chief! a chief! aye, your ancient chief. Von 
Artaveld ! His spirit lives, moves, still breathes 
in his son^ Von Artaveld, Von Artaveld." At 
these words^ a woman rushed forward ; and 
holding a white hood extended in one hand, and 
a large knife brandished in the other^ Ursula 
stood in view of the multitude. 

Thousands looked upon her sudden presence, 
and the prophetic tone in which she pro- 
nounced the name of Von Artaveld, as an 
augury of high import — as the voice of destiny 
proclaiming a chief. With the lower orders 



THE WHITE HOODS. 261 

the presence of Ursula had a pecuHar influence ; 
they beheld her with fear, but such a fear as 
carried with it the most absolute belief of her 
supernatural powers, and entire submission to 
her authority. The leaders of the insurgents^ 
who before suspected^ and now witnessed what 
a powerful effect her presence would produce to 
assist their cause, encouraged the impression she 
made upon the multitude^ and assuming an air 
of the most absolute attention, appeared ready 
to obey her behests. 

Ursula, at this moment, had placed herself 
upon that platform, near the pavilions that had 
been raised for the archers, from which they had 
aimed at the mark. Philip Von Artaveld was 
still upon the spot. Ursula now stood in a firm 
and raised attitude ; her hair streaming in the 
wind; her looks wild, disordered, and enthu- 
siastic ; whilst her eye gazed upwards, fixed on 
the vacant space, as if contemplating something 
beyond the vision of mere mortal creatures. 
She raised her arm, extended the white hood, 
and, in a voice of deep intonation, assumed her 
prophetic strain. " To thee, to thee. Von 
s 3 



262 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Artaveld^ thy father's spirit descends ; he calls 
thee to follow his footsteps; he calls thee to 
deliver thy country. And be this,^* she said, as 
she placed the white hood upon the head of Von 
Artaveld; " be this the ensign of your cause. 
The white hood that was cursed^ shall curse the 
prince who scorned it. Let not a man of you 
grasp a dagger, or draw a sword, till a white 
hood covers his brow. For it is Ursula, the 
prophetess — Ursula, the sovereign of the ele- 
ments, the mistress of spirits — she who can 
move upon the floods, or sail along the air; 
Ursula, who can ope the book of fate, though 
hidden in the lowest depths of hell ; it is she 
who now unfolds that dark and terrible volume, 
to tell you that the white hood shall prevail — 
the white hood shall be the restorer of your 
liberties, pure and free from stain, as its own 
unblemished hue, whilst it covers the heads of 
your oppressors with the blood of tyrants. Ye 
men of Ghent, then lift up your voice with one 
accord, and let your cry be Von Artaveld ! The 
White Hoods for liberty ! the White Hoods for 
Ghent ! 



THE WHITE HOODS. 263 

The multitude in an instant caught the spirit 
of enthusiasm which her wild eloquence diffused 
around, and " The White Hoods for Von Arta- 
veld!" "The White Hoods for liberty!" ^« The 
White Hoods for Ghent !" was shouted, echoed, 
and repeated from mouth to mouth, and band 
to band. 

Whilst Ursula addressed the crowd, and 
whilst their thundering exclamations still rent the 
air in reiterated clamour, several persons pre- 
pared for the occasion came forward, and, as in 
a moment, a thousand white hoods were distri- 
buted amongst the parties of the chief insurgents, 
and others of the discontented citizens, who now 
openly joined them. And this their sudden 
distribution was devoutly attributed by the 
vulgar to a miracle, wrought by the supernatural 
power of Ursula. But the artful plan of the 
hag, supported and carried on by the connivance 
of her employer, Peter du Bois, may sufficiently 
account for the miracle of the white hoods. It 
had been the aim of Du Bois, that some peculiar 
mark of distinction should be worn as the uni- 
form badge of his mixed followers, in order to 
render their persons so known and conspicuous, 
s4 



264 THE WHITE HOODS. 

that the danger to themselves^ of deserting his 
cause, would outweigh that of adhering to it. 
All the necessary preparations, therefore, for 
thus distributing the white hoods, had been pre- 
viously made at no small expence, and with the 
utmost diligence and secrecy. 

When the tumult had in some measure sub- 
sided from its first loud burst, the knights of 
St. Sebastian, delighted that in the election of a 
chief the choice had fallen upon their own cap- 
tain, Philip Von Artaveld, now hailed him as 
their leader in the public cause, and, with un- 
feigned joy, promised to support him at all times 
and through all dangers. Philip essayed to 
speak, but it was some time before he could 
obtain a hearing ; for the murmurs and accla- 
mations of the multitude still continued, whilst 
the bands of the insurgents, like the restless 
billows of the ocean, moved backward and for- 
ward with unceasing agitation, as the enthusiasm 
of party spirit rose or fell. 

Philip, at length, succeeded in obtaining 
attention, and having previously called to his 
side the Lord de Harzelle, who held a high 
office in Ghent, and John de Faucille, a prudent 



THE WHITE HOODS. 265 

and wealthy citizen, he thus addressed the 
people; '' Citizens, you have this day chosen me 
as your chief, from the honour and affection in 
which you hold the memory of my father^ who_, 
you are all unanimous in avowing, devoted 
himself to the good of your city, raised yom* 
opulence, and confirmed your franchises. You 
expect much from me, my fellow-citizens, who 
have neither his judgment, nor his experience, 
to steer the public bark through a sea so tempes- 
tuous as that of these stormy times. My father 
saved you all from sinking in a like peril, and 
you requited the debt by murdering him ! 
What then will be my security, should I accept 
the rule you now offer me ? If my father's fate 
is to be mine, it will be but a miserable recom- 
pence." 

*^' No, no, you are safe — you are secure — 
your father was allied with England. He gave 
our revenues to King Edward; but you are 
safe. Your father was murdered by a party, by 
a traitor." These expressions burst forth from 
several who stood near Von Artaveld. He 
resumed his address : — 



266 THE WHITE HOODS. 

^' I do accept the election. You have named 
me to be your chief — I accept it, not from 
private motives, or any desire of personal ad- 
vancement, but from the love I bear my native 
city^ and from a wish that the opulence and 
liberties my father secured to her with so much 
labour, and sealed with his death^ should not 
be lost for the want of a chief who will maintain 
your franchises. But I demand a council to 
act with me." 

^' You shall have a council," said Peter du 
Bois ; ^' a council composed of the leaders of our 
people, and the principal citizens, and you shall 
propose our first measure." 

'^ Let it be one of reason, justice, and mode- 
ration," replied Von Artaveld ; ^* let it " 

<^ Who talks of moderation ?" exclaimed 
Ursula, as she once more stept forward on the 
platform. " Is it you. Von Artaveld ? when 
these eyes of mine^ but yesterday, beheld the 
most accursed sight they ever looked upon — a 
thing that threatens the total ruin of your city. 
For but yesterday did I behold the people of 
Bruges toiling at that work which is to turn the 



THE WHITE HOODS. 261 

course of the river Lis from your good town of 
Ghent, to ruin all your commerce." 

This intelligence, that the canal at Bruges 
was actually begun, spread like wildfire_, and 
once more roused the people to madness. They 
would have instant redress ; they would march 
in a body towards Bruges, and the first act of 
the Wliite Hoods should be to destroy the work, 
even though in so doing they destroyed the 
workers. Philip Von Artaveld again addressed 
the multitude. 

" My fellow-citizens," he exclaimed, ^« I am 
chosen by you as your chief, and for your advan- 
tage I am to act in concert with your leaders. 
I am ready to do all that is necessary, and all 
that is daring, to obtain the redress of your griev- 
ances ; but let me counsel you before you resort 
to hostile measures, before you shed the blood of 
those who, born in the same land, are ruled by 
the same prince as yourselves, before you com- 
mence a bloody war upon your country, I con- 
jure you to hear my proposal. Let an honour- 
able deputation, composed of such persons as- 
you choose to name, wait upon the Earl ; let 



268 THE WHITE HOODS. 

our clerks, learned in the laws, and our citizens, 
valiant in supporting them, — let them represent 
to Lewis de Male all our grievances^ and demand 
redress. And, as a pledge of the Earl's good 
faith towards Ghent, let them solicit him to- 
bring back with them Sir Simon de Bete, who 
now lies a prisoner at Ecclo." 

<« Von Artaveld has spoken well ; we will 
have it so ; he shall head the deputation. Let 
the Earl give up our citizen ; we will have him 
out of prison." These and many other excla- 
mations again burst from the surrounding 
crowd. 

" In the mean time, my friends," continued 
Von Artaveld, " I, as your chief, command that 
Sir Walter d'Anghien and his companions, 
against whom vve have no charge, be set at 
liberty. Sir Walter has not injured us, nor 
can he in reason be responsible for the conduct 
of his uncle ; and you have no right to detain 
him as a hostage, till you are driven to com- 
mence a war by a refusal of redress. Sir Walter, 
you and your noble friends are free to return 
to Andrighien. Our knights of St. Sebastian 



THE WHITE HOODS. 269 

shall conduct you thither in safety, if you need 
an escort. For you, Gilbert Matthew, and your 
brothers, our citizens, in a fitting time and place, 
have much to charge against you all, but you 
must also be liberated. Von Artaveld will suffer 
no prisoners to be made of unarmed men. nor 
of any but such as may be ours in war^ if all our 
efforts to obtain redress should fail us." 

This proposal was loudly seconded by John 
de Faucille^ the lord of Harzelle, and several of 
the more respectable class of citizens. Even the 
artful leaders of the insurgents could find no 
just pretext to oppose against it. Von Artaveld 
was accordingly named as the head of the depu- 
tation to wait upon the Earl. Peter du Bois 
and John Lyon, who caught at every opportunity 
to mortify and embroil the Matthews in difficul- 
ties, now artfully proposed, that as Gilbert 
Matthew, and his brother Stephen, were both 
citizens of Ghent by birth, they should also join 
in the deputation. In their present situation 
Du Bois well knew they dared not refuse ; and 
he proposed the measure with a view that^ in 
in case an answer should be returned of an 



210 THE WHITE HOODS. 

offensive nature from the Earl, he might seize 
the occasion for throwing the blame of misma- 
nagement upon Gilbert Matthew — a circum- 
stance that, in all probability, would render the 
new deacon alike obnoxious to his master and to 
the people. All was now arranged ; and Philip 
Von Artaveld, instead of returning as victor of 
the archers into Ghent, set off, at the head of the 
deputation, to wait upon the Earl of Flanders 
at Andrighien. 

John Lyon and Peter du Bois, desirous of a 
private conference, returned with their bands 
towards the city. The mob now began to dis- 
perse, and the graver and elder class of citizens 
walked, alarmed and discontented, towards their 
own homes ; whilst the different leaders and 
captains of the White Hoods, having received 
their secret orders from Du Bois, commanded 
that their men should be held in such a state of 
preparation that they might be ready for action 
at a moment's notice. 

In a few hours the plain was completely 
cleared of the multitude ; but still, here and 
there, were seen stragglers who lingered near it, 



THE WHITE HOODS. 271 

anxious for the return of the deputation. The 
streets of Ghent, which in general exhibited 
groups of people busied in commerce^ as they 
thronged and jostled each other, each individual 
intent upon some personal duty or concern, now 
presented a very different aspect to the stirring 
occupations of traffic. Here were men seen 
strolling up and down with arms in their hands, 
a feeling of stern expectation imprinted on each 
countenance. At times they spoke together in 
an earnest, but mysterious, manner. And else- 
where might be observed other citizens collected 
into small parties — some vehemently talking, 
whilst their neighbours only listened, and shrug- 
ged up their shoulders in silence. Even the 
idle were now active, but for mischief; and the 
very women joined the mob, and, casting off all 
the decorum of their sex, railed louder than the 
men against the times, and helped to stir up 
rebellion. 

The shops of armourers, smiths, and fletchers, 
were literally thronged with people desirous to 
provide themselves with arms, either to join the 
insurrection, or to guard their own property 



272 THE WHITE HOODS. 

against its violent effects. Some houses were 
closed up, whilst others were opened ; and every 
hotel in Ghent was crowded with persons who 
came to hear the news, or to learn what had 
passed, or to settle what was to be done : in 
short, each man to talk politics more boldly than 
he had dared to do of late, and each to settle 
public affairs after his own way. 

It may well be supposed that this was a busy 
time with Martha Van Dredgger, and her hus- 
band Gerard^ the host and hostess of the Moon, 
whose common hall was now filled to overflow, 
with citizens, mechanics, and artisans, of all 
descriptions, besides divers of the more important 
members of the White Hoods. '^ Here !" cried 
Gerard^ " here ! a flagon of the best ale for 
Peter la Nuitee, the captain of the worshipful 
company of the glass-men." " A stool there, for 
Master Vanderblast, banner-bearer of the same." 
" And do ye hear, wife ! bring a trencher and a 
knife for David Oxhead, the butcher, one of our 
strongest supporters of liberty, who will knock 
you down a courtier like a calf, if he dare but 
touch so much as the tip of the horn of a fran- 



THE WHITE HOODS. 273 

chise. Worthy citizens !" continued the host, 
who, like most men of his calling, constantly 
chimed in with the popular feeling of his guests, 
" worthy citizens ! I drink this cup to the suc- 
cess of the White Hoods of Ghent; fill up to 
the brim, and drink to me the same." 

This example was eagerly followed by the 
guests, and " Success to the White Hoods of 
Ghent !" echoed through the apartment, as they 
roared it out with much spirit and good will ; 
and Gerard lost no time in chalking up the 
score of flagons that had washed it down their 
throats. Gerard now determined that the spirits 
of his guests should not expire for want of fuel 
to keep them in a blaze : he bustled every where, 
and set the drawers at full work, whilst his par- 
ticular instructions were reserved for the ear of 
his no less bustling little spouse. *' Here, wife ! 
here, Martha !" said he, " run down to the 
cellars, and tell the boys to broach all the casks 
of stale beer ; the citizens are getting warm ; 
Vanderblast is making them a speech ; they are 
all so hot-headed and dry-mouthed, that bad 
beer will go down as well as the best, and we 

VOL. I. T 



374 THE WHITE HOODS. 

shall get cleared of the old stock. And do you 
mix the sour wine with the clary ; they will never 
find it out ; they talk so much about the sweets 
of liberty, that it would be strange^ indeed^ if it 
did not sweeten their cups. Brisk^ brisk, I say ; 
go and do as I bid you ; I must be stirring here. 
Save us, all the saints ! how Vanderblast gets 
on ; he talks like a judge in any court, and 
shouts out speeches like an ass braying against 
rainy weather ! Well, these are strange times ; 
every one to his business, and mine is to make 
the most of them." 

Vanderblast, already known to the reader 
as having acted in the capacity of the city watch 
on the night of the arrest of Sir Simon de Bete, 
was, indeed, at this moment exerting all the 
powers of his eloquence in laying down the law, 
and in asserting the justice of the cause he had 
so warmly espoused. Timothy Vanderblast had 
long been the oracle of the ale-bench at the 
Moon ; and to a most insufferable conceit of his 
own wisdom, he united an attempt at a style of 
discourse superior to his station, a piece of pre- 
sumption he had originally contracted by having, 
4 



THE WHITE HOODS. 275 

in early life, acted as turn-spit in the kitchens of 
the public college at Liege, before he was pro- 
moted to the station of a glassman's apprentice 
at Ghent, for which promotion he quitted his 
former honourable employ in the service of that 
learned body. But Timothy brought to Ghent 
all the learning he could pick up second-hand 
from the varlets of the students at Liege ; when 
upon his migration to this city, his abuse of hard 
words, and constant habit of talking about what 
he did not understand, procured for him the 
pre-eminence above noticed. On the present 
occasion his oracular wisdom had displayed itself 
in a speech, as his auditory of mechanics and 
apprentices sat gazing, open-mouthed, in silent 
astonishment, around him. 

At length David Oxhead, the butcher, 
declared, as he gave Vanderblast a hearty slap 
on the back, " By the blessed Saint Nicholas ! 
brother Timothy, you have made as good a 
speech as the Earl himself could have done, had 
he turned rebel to upset his own rule ; and I say 
that Master Vanderblast shall be voted spokes- 
T 2 



276 THE WHITE HOODS. 

man of the company, for he has a throat hke a 
bull, and a heart like an ox." 

'^ And the brains of a calf," said Gerard, with 
a chuckle^ for he loved to pop in a bit of his 
own wit. 

*' I thank you, neighbour/' replied Vander- 
blast to Oxhead, '« I thank you for your good 
will. You are pleased to say so of me ; and I 
believe that I may have some trick of the schools, 
for I can write my name, or blow a glass bottle, 
with any man in Ghent. And as for the arts, 
my mother used to say that when I was a boy, I 
sucked them in like mother's milk, so that I 
could count from one to fourscore before I was 
fourteen years old, which made me take my 
manhood a year before the usual time.* And 
for the sciences, I was always specially fond of 
the law." 

" Well," said Jeremy Von Stitchen, a jerkin 
maker of Ghent, " I say it, and I don't care who 

* When the son of a burgher above twelve years of age 
could count from one to fourscore, he was considered old 
enough for commerce, and said to take his manhood. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 277 

knows it, that Master Vanderblast can give 
reasons for things as well as a priest. And as 
I, to be a neighbourly man and a good citizen, 
would not desert my fellows, but am willing to 
join the rebellion in a peaceable way, I should 
like to know reasons for what we are going to 
fight about ; and therefore, as I hear it is to hold 
up the liberty of the franchises of Ghent, be 
so good. Master Vanderblast, as to give us some 
reasons, out of the arts and sciences, for what 
a franchise may mean." 

"^ I understand you," replied Vanderblast, 
with a significant wink of much satisfaction; 
^' you would know what the word imputes, what 
it comes from ; or, as we of the school say, the 
chronology of the word franchise ?" 

" Justly so," answered Von Stitchen^ " and 
most aptly taken." 

Vanderblast looked wise, held up his head, 
hemmed, and with a most provokingly instruc- 
tive air, thus expounded : '' A franchise, Master 
Jeremy Von Stitchen, is a thing specially per- 
taining to the law, and by it upheld for us citi- 
zens, for the benefit of us and our predecessors, 
t3 



278 THE WHITE HOODS. 

to the latest generation. It is the citizen's good 
name, his boast, and his extinction. In short, a 
franchise is a franchise^ and means a restraint to 
do all things according to law, whereupon we 
found our grounds of rebellion. A franchise 
allows of seeking for justice in our own way, 
without being cheated by the lawyers to help us 
to it. It gives us Hberty to put up whom we 
please, and to put down whom we please, when 
things go wrong in the state ; and to hang all 
the nobles, who are no better than they should 
be. It extinguishes all that is profitable, and 
smashes earls^ governments, and princes with as 
much ease as if they were made of glass. This 
is the meaning of the word franchise^ and for 
this we will live or die like loyal rebels, and 
magnanimous conspirators." 

" That we will," said Oxhead ; " and rather 
than brook tyrants and tyranny, we will turn 
this city into the slaughter-house of justice, and 
kill and knock down every beast of them all, 
without favour or distinction." 

" But what I am most thinking about," said 
a mariner of the Scheld, '« is, how the devil that 



THE WHITE HOODS. 279 

old woman could make the White Hoods fly 
about so fast as they did to-day. Why, they 
came as thick about our ears as sea-gulls drive 
on shore before stormy weather ; the witch raised 
them as fast, and with as much ease, as she would 
the old one himself." 

" She raised them with more ease, I take it," 
said the host, "than she could put them down 
again, so long as they leave us a head to wear 
them upon." 

" What ! do you talk of wearing a white 
hood, man," said Oxhead to the host, " and 
your house so specially in favour with my lord's 
great man, Gilbert Matthew? Your ears will 
pay for it." 

" May be not," answered Gerard, " for my ears 
are always open to a customer, and my tongue 
too. Us of the public vocation^ Master Oxhead, 
must live for the public, as we live by the public ; 
and though I wish well to every White Hood of 
you all, I have no ill-will towards my lord or his 
people, for they are good friends to the spigot 
and flagon ; and a man must live by his friends. 
So I see no harm, in drinking this cup, to say, 
t4 



280 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Heaven bless the Earl, and the White Hoods 
to boot." 

This comical mixture of a spirit of loyalty 
and treason^ so openly avowed by the simple 
Gerard, produced more mirth than anger, and 
the whole party resumed their politics, and 
seasoned each discussion with so many flagons, 
drawn from the cellars of the host, that it was 
confidently averred, when Martha Van Dredgger 
next attended mass, and offered up a lighted 
candle to the shrine of her favourite saint, she 
accompanied the offering with a petition, that 
the rebellion of the White Hoods might espe- 
cially be suffered to prevail, for the good of the 
Moon. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 281 



CHAP. XIII. 

Upon the evening after the memorable day, the 
events of which formed the subject of the last 
chapter^ John Lyon and his nephew, Peter du 
Bois, were closeted in earnest conference. The 
latter^ the most artful of all the insurgents, had 
so acted upon the weak mind of his relative, that 
John might be considered little more than a 
tool in his hand. They had both publicly 
avowed that their only motive for insurrection 
arose from a desire to serve the citizens of 
Ghent^ yet it must be already known to the 
reader, that a deep resentment against Gilbert 
Matthew chiefly actuated the conduct of John 
Lyon, and a cunning, selfish, and ambitious 
temper, with the hope to repair a broken for- 
tune, stimulated the exertions of Du Bois. A 
satisfactory peace between the Earl and his 
people, was, therefore, the last thing to be 
desired by the uncle or the nephew, since it 



:282 THE WHITE HOODS. 

would neither satisfy the resentment of the one, 
nor improve the bankrupt estate of the other. 

Stilly neither John Lyon nor Peter du Bois 
were yet so far gone in guilt as to be wholly 
reckless of their deeds. They began by hoping 
to achieve their object without the commission 
of actual cruelty upon others. How far they 
afterwards increased in crime, as their evil pro- 
pensities gathered strength by indulgence, will 
be seen in the sequel. 

John Lyon, upon meeting Du Bois, appeared 
thoughtful and moody, and there was something 
of indifference in his manner that surprised the 
nephew, for he did not enter warmly into what 
was their usual subject of discussion. " You 
are but in bad spirits this evening, uncle," said 
Peter; '' what has happened, may I ask, thus to 
affect you ?" 

" To speak truth," replied John Lyon, " I 
have this day been much moved by the earnest 
remonstrances of my daughter; she fears our 
plans will end badly, and, timid as she used to 
be towards me, she has now cast it off, and is 
grown as bold in argument almost as ourselves. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 283 

She has had the audacity to urge — in short, she 
has plainly told me, I am nothing better than a 
traitor to my prince, who so lately spared my 
life, when my own party had not strength 
enough to guard me from the laws. She 
threatened me with the vengeance of Heaven 
if I persisted, and then, with so many tears, 
with such an affectionate importunity^ conjured 
me to abandon my false friends, as she termed 
them, that I was nearly shaken in my purpose. 
However, at length I succeeded in getting rid of 
her supplications, by sending her to pray for me 
at the vespers of St. Nicholas." 

" And can this move a man engaged in plots 
like ours?" said Du Bois, sneeringly. ^' If such 
things affect you, uncle, you should not have 
gone thus far in matters of deep moment. My 
pretty cousin, Anna, means well ; but she knows 
nothing of our affairs, nor shall she. Women 
should keep the house, and mind their toys and 
their prayers, and not interfere with things 
beyond their sense; nor should the cry of a 
petted girl move the spirit of a man, who looks 
to overturn a country. Fie, fie, out upon it — 



THE WHITE HOODS. 

it is unworthy of you. But I have news that 
will demand our utmost vigilance^ to prevent its 
fatal effects to our cause. You must act this 
night, or all is over." 

" What do you mean, Peter," exclaimed 
John Lyon. " This must be news, indeed." 

^« Aye, and such news^" replied Du Bois^ '' as 
we little thought to hear. Could I have fore- 
seen what has chanced^ I would rather have 
chosen the devil for a chief than Von Artaveld. 
Would you think it ; he so harangued my Lord 
of Flanders, that Lewis called him a brave spirit, 
overwhelmed him with commendations, and has 
promised to take off the tax on the navigation of 
the Scheld ; to prevent the canal going on at 
Bruges ; and, as a warrant for his farther good 
intentions towards Ghent, resolved to set Sir 
Simon de Bete at liberty; and to-morrow the 
foolish old goldsmith intends to gratify his 
ridiculous pomp, by making a public entry 
into the city. And what think you is the 
condition stipulated as our part of the per- 
formance, in requital for these condescensions 
of my lord ?" 



THE WHITE HOODS. 285 

" Perhaps to pay some yearly levy, of our 
own naming," said John Lyon. 

" No," replied Du Bois ; " we are required to 
tear off our white hoods; to lay down our arms; 
and that your head and mine, as the instigators 
of revolt, shall be at the mercy of Lewis de 
Male." 

^' That is as much as to say," said the uncle, 
" that they may be taken off so soon as Gilbert 
Matthew bids the provost raise the axe, and he 
will not tarry in the bidding." 

" That will be the end of it," answered Du 
Bois; " though Von Artaveld protests he has 
expressly stipulated no danger shall fall upon 
our heads^ and that the Earl, having the power 
to do so, will dismiss us with a reprimand." 

" I will not trust to it, however," said John 
Lyon ; '« something must instantly be done ; we 
must gain over all our parties, and the several 
trades, to determine upon keeping on their 
white hoods; they must promise to stand by us 
and uphold our acts, before my ancient friend, 
Sir Simon de Bete, can be known to be set free 
from prison. If he appears, as the pledge of the 



286 THE WHITE HOODS. 

EarFs good faith, ere the people are secured — 
are our own — all will be lost, indeed." 

" Leave me to deal with Sir Simon," said Du 
Bois ; " I have a trap ready to catch the old fox ; 
he shall not be at liberty to do us mischief. He 
sends me word, that the Earl has graciously 
communicated his intention of liberating him, 
and that he could wish me to meet him without 
the walls of Ghent, that I may marshal him to 
the market-place, where he will surprise the 
citizens with such an address upon his captivity 
and restoration, as they never yet heard. Look, 
here is Sir Simon's letter ; and the old goldsmith 
writes with as much importance as if the world 
itself had stopped on its wheels since he was 
confined, and could only be set going again 
when he was once more free." 

'^ His wife, the Lady Judith, I understand," 
said John Lyon, ^' has been most violent in her 
complaints to our burgomasters, in consequence 
of his detention.'' 

" She has, indeed," answered Du Bois. 
" The shrew missed her husband too much, to 
be lonor without him ; she wanted Sir Simon for 



THE WHITE HOODS. 287 

the exercise of her tongue, to rail at its accus- 
tomed object. Doubtless the dame has laid up 
stores of wrath to welcome the good man, who 
now escapes a prison to return to a worse thral- 
dom. But the varlets and the waiting damsels 
will rejoice, since, beside their own storms, they 
have lately endured those that would otherwise 
have been showered on Sir Simon." 

Whilst Du Bois made these remarks, in his 
usual tone of sarcastic observation, John Lyon 
walked slowly towards the upper end of the 
room, and suddenly pausing, he turned about, 
and said to Du Bois, *' Nephew, I have be- 
thought me of a plan which can be executed to 
save us. Yet we must not trust Von Artaveld 
with all our measures. He is young, brave, 
and of a noble spirit. It is well we have chosen 
him for our chief, since he has an unlimited 
influence with our more sober citizens ; and his 
name acts, even like a spell of Ursula's, to rouse 
and animate our people. But though I grant 
all this, Von Artaveld is neither politic nor 
secret ; he will do every thing in the open light 
of day ; and, however bold and useful he might 



288 THE WHITE HOODS. 

be in the execution of our schemes, he would do 
them rashly ; we, perhaps, have been rash, too, 
in choosing him so soon. But still we are the 
leaders of our own bands ; we can command them 
without his concurrence. First tell me when is 
it that the Earl of Flanders will send to demand 
that the white hoods should be cast off, and that 
your head and mine shall attend upon his mercy 
and his will ?" 

" I have not positively learnt the time," 
answered Du Bois. '^ But some say that his 
bailiff will appear in the square of the market- 
place to-morrow, and there issue the procla- 
mation." 

" Then," said John Lyon, " will I be busy 
this night. Let all our men, each wearing his 
white hood, and fully armed, be assembled at an 
early hour to-morrow morning. We will then 
march them in a body to the market-place. I 
have not time to communicate my further pur- 
pose at present. But^ at any rate, Sir Simon 
must not be suffered to harangue the people, 
and his being at liberty for the present must rest 
unknown, else the citizens may so far rely upon 



THE WHITE HOODS. 289 

the promises of the Earl, seeing one fulfilled^ 
that they may patch up a peace with Lewis on 
easy terms ; this shall not be done, and we must 
force them to do something that shall render 
peace more dangerous than war." 

" Your orders shall be punctually fulfilled," 
replied Du Bois. " Why now, uncle, you are 
yourself again, and speak and act as a man. 
Away, then, with women and folly; think no 
more of your daughter, and leave the house 
without bidding her farewell, or you will turn 
again by her breath, like the vane on the town 
steeple. Arnoul le Clerc shall head our people, 
and conduct them wherever you will join them. 
And as for Sir Simon, I, and a body of my 
chosen friends, will deal with him before sun- 
rise to-morrow, for he leaves his prison to-night. 
He shall make no public speeches, I warrant 
you. But there is one thing essential — we want 
tnoney. I bestowed our last bag of crowns 
amongst our rascals, upon the morning of the 
archery. We have yet committed no public 
outrage ; actual hostilities are not yet begun, so 

VOL. I. u 



290 THE WHITE HOODS. 

that we cannot yet help ourselves from the bags of 
others, and our men must have money to secure 
them ours ; they thirst for more of that dross^ for 
which they would sell both body and soul to the 
highest bidder." 

" This is a hard point," said John Lyon. 
^« I have httle left. Gilbert Matthew deprived 
me of my office, and since then, gold, land, 
jewels, all I had, has been spent in forwarding 
our cause. My fortune is almost as broken as 
your own. Unless we begin to act soon, I shall 
be little better than a beggar." 

" If things, then, are so desperate with you, 
we must look for gold elsewhere," answered 
Peter ; " for gold must be had, and this night 
too. Let me see; what can be done? We 
cannot ask Von Artaveld, since he must not 
know of our present scheme. But I know one 
who has the means; and I will gain it, if possible 

by fair words, and if not " Du Bois stopt 

short, and struck forcibly the haft of his sword, 
as he grasped it and half drew it from its 
sheath. 



THE WHITE HOODS. 291 

" Of whom do you speak?" said John Lyon, 
who did not choose to notice the action^ though 
he remarked it. 

". I speak," rephed Peter, " of that wretched 
old dotard, Bernard Goldthrift, the Antwerp 
usurer, who joined us, because the Earl of 
Flanders laughed at his threats for bond debts, 
and Gilbert Matthew paid back the principal, 
and purloined the interest for his own benefit; 
a treasurer worthy of his master. I will see old 
Goldthrift. The wretch has stores of wealth, 
yet dies daily in the fear of want, whilst age and 
misery lead him by a protracted torture to that 
grave which soon must hold his wretched body 
— a mere anatomy that will scarcely fatten a 
worm." 

" You will never get a crown from him," 
said John Lyon, '' unless your securities were as 
substantial as a prince could offer." 

*'^ I will try, however," answered Du Bois; 
'' and, in the mean time, do you prepare every 
thing for to-morrow ; I will meet you again before 
I rest, but not here. In my own house, this 
night, we will once again hold a conference with 
u 2 



292 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Arnoul le Clerc and our friends, in our usual 
council chamber." 

^« I will meet you there at midnight," said 
John Lyon; " till then, farewell." 

With this agreement the uncle and the 
nephew parted. John Lyon lost no time in 
directing his bands of White Hoods what to do, 
and Peter du Bois went in quest of Bernard 
Goldthrift, who now resided in Ghent, and whom 
the reader may remember as forming one of the 
secret conclave, whose presence so much shocked 
Anna, at the house of Peter du Bois. 

When Du Bois entered the habitation of the 
wretched usurer^ he was shewn into an inner 
apartment, where every thing seemed to speak 
the mind and the manners of the owner. The 
room was large^ gloomy^ and ancient; the win- 
dows, placed near the ceiling, were guarded, like 
a prison, with iron bars ; and not only was every 
arrangement in the house devoid of the elegance 
which wealth can supply^ but an appearance of 
poverty and meanness seemed studiously adopted; 
for comfort or convenience were things that 
had never been found within the dwelling of old 



THE WHITE HOODS. 293 

Bernard. The walls of the room, black from 
time and the accumulated dust of ages, reeked 
with damp ; here nothing seemed to thrive but 
the spiders^ which, large in size and numerous 
in their generation, had made their webs of 
hanging festoons from cornice to cornice in 
undisturbed security. 

A stove was fixed in one corner of the apart- 
ment. A rough hewn oak table stood in the 
centre, and near to it a chair of great antiquity, 
and probably of German manufacture, since 
three of the legs represented, in rude carving, 
animals common to the forest. The fourth had 
been a repair of old Bernard's, cut out of com- 
mon deal. In a niche was a crucifix, and near 
it a second table, containing a vast quantity of 
brown and dusty parchments, with a variety of 
miscellaneous articles, that seemed to have been 
collected together without any purpose of utility. 
These had most likely been saved by the miser 
from the rubbish of his less thrifty acquaintance ; 
for that nothing should he lost, or could he useless, 
was a maxim which Goldthrift had all his life 
u3 



294 THE WHITE HOODS. 

observed. He was a great collector, therefore, 
of whatever he could get for nothing ; and, like 
many other collectors^ he had stores of relics, 
whose only character was their uselessness, and 
whose only value might be their age. 

The room was hung with tapestry of the old 
Flemish school, which represented the austerities 
of several celebrated saints ; some were flaying 
their backs for the honour of the church, whilst 
others, the woeful apparitions of abstinence and 
superstition, looked almost as bare-boned as the 
skeleton^ which was introduced as an emblem of 
death, at their feet. It was not at all impro- 
bable that the images thus constantly presented 
to the eyes of the usurer, might act upon his 
mind as a subject of encouragement and emula- 
tion in his own habits of self-denial ; for meagre 
living had wasted every muscle of Goldthrift's 
body, and had consumed the very skin upon his 
bones. His eyes sunk in their sockets, and yet 
(from contrast with his hollow cheeks,) seemingly 
almost starting from his head, rendered him 
altogether so ghastly an object, that had a painter 



THE WHITE HOODS. 295 

desired a study, personally to embody the idea 
of famine^ Bernard Goldthrift would have been 
the model of his choice. 

The door had been opened to Du Bois by a 
girl of about twelve years old ; her countenance 
was thin and sickly. The child having the misfor- 
tune to be the orphan niece of old Bernard, was 
at once his companion, his drudge, and his 
housekeeper — assisted occasionally in her do- 
mestic duties by an old man, who, from mere 
habit rather than gratitude, continued to afford 
some slight service to the usurer, as he doled 
out to him a paltry pittance under the name of 
charity. 

Peter told the child he had business of im- 
portance with her uncle, and much desired to 
see him ; but the little girl declared he was not 
at home, in a manner that convinced Du Bois 
she spoke the truth. " And where is he gone, 
my dainty damsel ?" said Peter, " and when 
will he return again ?" 

" He is gone to the market, I believe," replied 
the child, '^ for we are hungry, and uncle never 
buys meat but at evenings, because he then 
u 4 



296 THE WHITE HOODS. 

picks up the bits that are left from the morning 
cheap, and he wont let me go, for fear I should 
give as much as people might ask me for them ; 
and I wish he was come home, for I want some 
supper." 

" Sordid wretch !" muttered Du Bois. " But 
he must help us ; I will not leave the house till 
he does so." Peter then told the girl he would 
await her uncle's return, as his business could 
not brook delay ; and the child, desiring him to 
stay in the room where he was, shut the door, 
and returned to her accustomed drudgery in the 
kitchen. 

Peter threw himself into the old chair, and 
his own busy thoughts for some time afforded 
him ample employment, till, growing impatient, 
he began to think of retreating for the present, 
to call again at a later hour. He was about to 
rise from the chair, when, all at once, he thought 
he heard a strange sound under the flooring at 
the farthest end of the room ; he listened, and 
the noise was repeated. Peter sat quite still, 
determined to ascertain the cause ; and his own 
figure was tolerably well concealed by the dusk 



THE WHITE HOODS. 297 

of the evening, which had nearly closed in since 
his arrival at the house. 

Du Bois fixed his eyes upon the spot whence 
the sounds had seemed to issue^ and at length 
he observed a secret trap-door suddenly drop 
down. In the next minute the wretched figure 
of Bernard Goldthrift slowly and cautiously 
ascended, his eyes glistening with an expression 
of internal satisfaction^ as a lamp which he car- 
ried in his hand shewed plainly the haggard 
and ghastly features of the miser. Bernard put 
down the lamp upon the ground^ and then 
secured the trap-door that led to the idol of his 
worship, the object of his hopes and fears — his 
gold. 

When he had secured the trap by its secret 
spring, he again took the lamp in his hand, rose 
up^ and turned towards the table. The first 
object he beheld was — Peter du Bois, sitting 
quietly in the old chair, with his eyes attentively 
fixed on himself ! But what words can describe 
his dismay at such an unexpected sight ? Terror 
and despair seemed to struggle for the mastery 
in the expression of his countenance, whilst, old, 



298 THE WHITE HOODS. 

weak, and helpless, he appeared ready to sink 
into the earth from the shock of so sudden an 
alarm. His senses seemed bewildered ; and 
prudence, though not cunning, forsook him, as 
he exclaimed, in a shrill scream of apprehension, 
" I am betrayed ! ruined ! robbed ! murdered ! 
but I have no gold there (pointing to the trap- 
door), no gold there; it is only a place I visit 
for penance, and to mortify my sins." 

" Is it so, old Bernard ?" said Du Bois, sar- 
castically, as he quitted his seat. " I should 
have thought you go thither to contemplate 
wealth which might give you comfort, whilst 
you are daily consuming in misery. But you 
need not fear me. I have discovered your secret, 
(Bernard shook his head) ; nay, you know I 
have discovered it, and by your own folly ! The 
child thought you were from home ; she desired 
me to wait here." 

" Aye, aye," replied the miser, in a tone 
tremulous with age and infirmity; but, cautious 
from habitual suspicion, he added, with a signi- 
ficant look, " Girls are thoughtless ; girls will 
prate ; so I never let my niece know when I 



THE WHITE HOODS. 299 

descend from the light of day to practise morti- 
fications in the bowels of the earth. I tell her 
I am going out, and send her away to do her 
duties in my household. But how came it, I 
wonder, that I should forget to-day to lock this 
room door, that nobody might disturb my hour 
of meditation ?" 

" Why^ because it was fated," said Peter, 
" that I should come in by it. Never mind, 
man, you are safe, for I am neither robber nor 
murderer. But these excuses will not serve 
with me. Do you think I cannot fathom you, 
old Goldthrift ? Thou at thy meditations ! Yes, 
to glut thy eyes upon bond securities, bags of 
gold, chests of ingots, and caskets of rich jewels. 
Such were thy meditations in yonder cave of 
iniquity, where the groans of the sufferer, from 
whom you have wrested their last acre of land, 
never reach you ; where widows tears and 
orphans sighs can never come to blot the writ- 
ings, or to waft away the last pledge of hard 
necessity ; where thy meditations calculate upon 
the next spendthrift who hastes to complete his 
ruin under thy auspices ; and where thou canst 



300 THE WHITE HOODS. 

number the rogues and fools who will all fly to 
thee for help, and curse thee while they take it." 

" Why, how now, Peter ?" said old Bernard^ 
trembling with fear, as his eye glanced upon Du 
Bois with a look of astonishment and suspicion. 
" Why, how is this ?" and he added^ with a 
strange exclamation that terror involuntarily 
provoked, and which the miser checked and 
endeavoured to tm-n into a laugh of good fellow- 
ship^ '^ We are comrades, and must not rate 
each other." 

Peter saw the uncommon advantage he had 
gained in having discovered the secret of Ber- 
nard's treasure; and well knowing he could 
turn it to account by alarming the fears of the 
coward who stood before him, he again spoke in 
a rough and determined manner. '^ I know 
you have wealth, Bernard, and now I know 
where it lies concealed — useless, worthless as 
its master. Yet it may do much good, if pro- 
perly employed. Dost thou ever consider, 
Goldthrift, that there it shall remain, till it is 
first opened to pay the man who shall do Ghent 
the service of putting that miserable carcase of 



THE WHITE HOODS. 301 

thine within a coffin and a grave ? Dost thou 
ever think of this ?" 

" Why, aye^ yes, yes," answered Bernard, 
greatly affrighted, ^* I do think upon it some- 
times, when I mortify for my sins ; but I am not 
dead yet, Peter, and I never had much to do 
with the leeches, and so I hope to live yet to see 
you as great a man as you hope to be." 

«^ And live you may for me," said Du Bois ; 
" and as for my greatness, you must help me to 
that — you must serve me." 

" Certainly," replied Goldthrift, " any thing 
in reason, any thing within my poor power and 
means. I would serve you, Peter," continued 
the cunning old rogue, who now thought Du 
Bois was coming round to a better humour, 
<^ I would serve you, as I would my dearest 
friends." 

" I hope not," replied Du Bois, " for I should 
be loth to loose daylight in company with thy 
bags and ingots yonder. Your service to me 
must begin by an act of liberation." 

" Any thing," said the usurer, who now 
shuffled towards the table of parchments, think- 



302 THE WHITE HOODS. 

ing Du Bois came to borrow money; " any 
thing within reason, and such as a poor old man 
like me may do without offence to his con- 
science." 

" Conscience !" exclaimed Peter, laughing — 
^* no, no, I will not make you offend against 
conscience, by forcing you to lend money without 
exacting interest. All I want is, a gift — a 
free and generous gift, to help to carry on our 
cause with some of your imprisoned crowns." 

If the reader has ever chanced to see any 
human creature whose whole soul, and even 
body, has suddenly undergone the most violent 
opposition of feeling from joy to dismay^ from 
hope to despair^ he may have some idea of the 
look and manner of old Bernard at this moment, 
yet it would be difficult to describe it, so per- 
fectly astonished, and even stupified, was the 
miser at the proposal of a gift, that he only 
stared in silence at the audacity of Du Bois, as 
he alternately raised and let fall his hands in 
amazement. At length avarice and indignation 
got the better even of fear itself, and Bernard 
found the use of his tongue to vent curses upon 



THE WHITE HOODS. 303 

Peter for his impudent demand — curses too 
shocking for repetition. 

Du Bois for some time let the storm rage, 
and then very calmly said, " Bernard, I give 
you a fair warning. I have no interest to keep 
the secret of the entrance to your cavern there, 
and our White Hoods have an eye as keen as 
yours for gold, with stronger arms and younger 
feet to gain access to it. They shall pay their 
respects to you." 

" They, they," replied old Goldthrift ; « they 
cannot, they would not harm me ; I am their 
comrade, one of their leaders." 

'^ And therefore they would share with you/' 
said Du Bois. ^' But it so happens, that you, 
being as you yourself admits one of their leaders, 
is at this moment a thing of such peril, that 
unless you comply with my request before to- 
morrow, that very circumstance will devote your 
head to the provost marshal. The Earl has 
agreed to redress all the grievances of the citi- 
zens, on condition that every leader of the White 
Hoods shall be given up to justice. Your death 
and mine is certain, unless we can this night 



304 THE WHITE HOODS. 

find gold (aye gold, old Bernard), to make our 
people keep on their white hoods, and stand by 
us who are their leaders ; to keep our heads upon 
their shoulders." 

" And must I, must I," said the miser, in a 
tone of voice which expressed the most acute 
anguish of mind, ^^ must I part with all that is 
dear to me on earth ? Is it," he continued, 
wringing his hands, "is it for this that I have 
toiled day and night, denied myself comfort and 
rest ? Is it for this that I have been cursed and 
hated all my life long, and now in my old age 

to have my heart broken, to I cannot, I 

cannot do it. The Earl is merciful ; the provost 
cannot act without his sanction ; he may relent. 
Think of some other way " 

'^ There is no other way," said Du Bois, 
'^ that can save you, for you are especially ob- 
noxious to Gilbert Matthew, and he has sworn 
to take vengeance upon you the first opportunity. 
You refused him the thousand crowns he wanted 
before he obtained the new office ; and can you 
now hope, unless our White Hoods are sup- 
ported by us, that they will support tis — can 



THE WHITE HOODS. 305 

you hope, I say, long to keep that venerable 
head of yours upon your shoulders, most worthy 
Bernard ? Come, think it is to save your own 
life ; open, then, your bags, and set the coins 
free ; they can give you no comfort in the tomb ; 
for remember, as your only delight is now to 
look upon them, your eyes then will be closed 
in darkness." 

Thus with threats and arguments did Peter 
du Bois continue to act upon the mind of the 
usurer, who at length was so alarmed by the 
exaggerated picture which Du Bois drew of his 
danger, that he consented to advance a sum of 
money from his secret store. Having reluctantly 
done this, Goldthrift prepared to descend once 
more into his den alone ; but this Peter would 
not admit. " No, no, Bernard," said he, ^' I 
will go with you ; the especial value which I feel 
for your neck will not allow me to trust to 
your conscience the counting out the sum that 
must be used to save it. We must not spare 
the gold, to hang the master of the bags. 
Come, I'll go with you; open the trap-door, 
and give me the lamp." 

VOL. I. X 



306 THE WHITE HOODS. 

Gold thrift, with evident reluctance, com- 
plied. Had he been descending the steps of 
that dungeon, with which Du Bois had 
threatened him, he could scarcely have done 
so with a slower pace, or with a more ghastly 
expression of countenance. His spirit writhed 
within him, and gave vent to its secret agonies 
by sundry deep sighs and groans, which accom- 
panied the turn of the keys, as he opened a 
chest of iron. 

" Come,'* said Du Bois, " let me spare you 
the painful office of giving liberty to these pri- 
soners. I will take them out, and begin from 
that bag^ that large leathern bag." 

" No, no; not that," exclaimed the miser, 
eagerly ; " not that ; those are florins, all - of 
pure gold^ and not wanting one grain in 
weight. Hercj take fifty silver crowns of 
Flemish money." , 

" Fifty crowns !" cried Du Bois, " that is 
nothing : fifty crowns amongst our bands ! Are 
you mad to offer it? Give gold, fair gold, 
every coin full, round, and heavy, stamped with 
an image that might bribe the devil himself to 



THE WHITE HOODS. 307 

worship it. Besides, we can carry a larger sum 
in gold pieces in a smaller space." 

" Nay, but it must do ; fifty crowns must do," 
answered Bernard, with a groan. '' I cannot 
bring my heart to touch the florins for such a 
purpose." 

" But the provost will touch thy throat, then, 
old Goldthrift," said Peter; '^ and as I now 
bethink me that he is a man accessible to some 
feeling of pity in his way, perhaps you may like 
to keep those florins, in order to use them as a 
bribe with him, to procure you the grace of 
hanging, or the axe, instead of being broken on 
the wheel." 

" Take fifty florins, then," cried the alarmed 
miser, as, with a terrified countenance, he forced 
himself to use a desperate effort to subdue his 
own avarice, and thrust his hand into the bag. 

" Not so," replied Peter; " we shall lose 
some precious moments in the telling of them 
out ; give me the bag." 

" I cannot — I will not," said the miser. " A 
curse upon thee, Du Bois ; would you have me 
tear out my heart to give you ?" 
X 2 



308 THE WHITE HOODS. 

" No/' replied Du Bois, " only the gold. 
The provost, Goldthrift; think upon the provost." 

" Take a hundred pieces," said Bernard, 
« but not all." 

" Hanging or beheading," continued Peter ; 
" the provost, the provost. Master Goldthrift." 

*^ Take the bag, then, and may the curse of 
Gehazi go with it," exclaimed the usurer, as he 
threw the bag of florins upon the ground, sud- 
denly shut down the lid of the chest, and placed 
himself upon it. " And now, Du Bois," said 
the wretch, "be satisfied; for I will not yield 
one florin more, though it were to save both life 
and soul. You shall steep your hands in my 
blood, and trample me under foot, before you 
again so much as look into the chest." 

" Well," replied Du Bois, " for the present 
I will be satisfied ; and as for thy blood ! I would 
not soil the bright blade of a good sword by 
dipping it into such pollution. It would be too 
honourable a death for thee, old Goldthrift ; for 
thou wert certainly born to starve with thy own 
rats, and die amongst them, or else to make thy 
last leap from the hangman's tree." 



THE WHITE HOODS. 309 

Peter, well satisfied with the sum he had 
obtained, immediately departed, leaving the 
miser to deplore its loss ; and after an interview 
with Ursula^ he hastened to meet the leaders 
and captains of his own bands at the chamber of 
midnight council, where John Lyon was ex- 
pected finally to settle every desperate plan, 
which^ it was agreed, should be executed on the 
following morning. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



London : 

Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode, 

New- Street- Square. 



.^NIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS-URBANA 




