CIHM 


ICIUIH 


Microfiche 


Collection de 


Series 


microfiches 


(Monographs) 


(monographies) 




Canadian Instituta for Historical Microraproductions / Institut Canadian da microraproductiona historiquas 






Technical and Bibliographic Notes / Notes technique et bibliographiques 



The Institute has attempted to obtain the best original 
copy available for filming. Features of this copy which 
may be bibliographically unique, which may alter any of 
the images in the reproduction, or which may 
significantly change the usual method of filming are 
checked below. 



D 
D 
D 
D 

n 

D 
D 
D 
D 

n 



Coloured covers / 
Couverture de couleur 

Covers damaged / 
Couverture endommagee 

Covers restored and/or laminated / 
Couverture restaur^ et/ou peiliculee 

Cover tnie missiny / Le titre de couverture manque 

Coloured maps / Cartes geographiques en couleur 

Coloured ink (i.e. other than blue or black) / 
Encre de couleur (I.e. autre que bleue on noire) 

Coloured plates and/or illustrations / 
Planches et/ou illustrations en couleur 

Bound with other material / 
Relie avec d'autres documents 

Only edition available / 
Seule edition disponible 

Tight binding may cause shadows or distortion 
along interior margin / La reliure serree peut 
causer de I'ombre ou de la distorsion le long de 
la marge interieure. 

Blank leaves added during restorations may appear 
within the text. Whenever possible, these have 
been omitted from filming / II se peut que certaines 
pages blanches ajout^es lors d'une restauration 
apparaissent dans le texte, mais, torsque cela &aH 
possible, ces pages n'ont pas 6te film^es. 



L'Institut a microfilm6 le meilleur examplaire qu'il lui a 
6te possible de se procurer. Les details de cet exem- 
plaire qui sont peut-§tre uniques du point de vue bibli- 
ographique, qui peuvent modifier une image reproduite, 
ou qui peuvent exiger une modifications dans la m6th- 
ode normale de filmage sont indiqu6s ci-dessous. 

I I Coloured pages / Pages de couleur 

I j Pages damaged / Pages endommagees 

I j Pages restored and/or laminated / 
' — ' Pages restaur6es et/ou pellk:ul6es 

rj] Pages discoloured, stained or foxed / 
^^^ Pages d^color^s, tachetees ou piquees 

I I Pages detached / Pages d6tach6es 

r^ Showthrough / Transparence 

r~l/ Quality of print varies / 

'-^ Qualite inhale de l'impressk>n 

I I Includes supplementary material / 
— Comprend du materiel supplementaire 

I j Pages wholly or partially obscured by errata 
' — ' slips, tissues, etc., have been returned to 
ensure the best possible image / Les pages 
totalement ou partiellement obscurcies par un 
feuillet d'errata, une pelure, etc., ont 6\e film^es 
d nouveau de fagon k obtenir la meilleure 
image possible. 

I I Opposing pages with varying colouration or 
' — ' discolourations are filmed twice to ensure the 
best possible image / Les pages s'opposant 
ayant des colorations variables ou des decol- 
orations sont film^es deux fois afin d'obtenir la 
meilleur image possible. 







AddHronal comments / 
Commentaires supplementaires: 



Various pagfngs. 



This ittm is f ilm«t at the raduction ratio chackad bektw/ 

Cc docuntant tst filmi au taux de raduction indiqua ci-dassous. 

lOX 14X 18X 



22X 



/ 



26 X 



»X 



12X 



16X 



20X 



24X 



28X 



12X 



The copy film«d h«r« has b««n raproduccd thanks 
to tha ganarosity of: 

University of New Brunswick 
Ward Chlpman Library 



L'axamplaira filmA fut raproduit grica k ia 
g4nirosit* da: 

University of New BrunswicK 
Ward Chlpman Library 



Tha imagas appaaring hara ara tha bast quality 
possibia considaring tha condition and iagibility 
of tha original copy and in kaaping with tha 
filming contract spaeif icat:ona. 



Las imagas suivantas ont *t* raproduitas avac la 
plus grand soin. compta tanu da Is condition at 
da la nattatA da l'axamplaira film*, at an 
conformity avac laa conditions du contrst da 
fiimaga. 



Original copias in printad papar covars mrn fllmad 
boginning with tha front covor and anding on 
tha last paga with a printad or illuatratad impraa- 
sion. or tha back covar whan appropriata. All 
othar original copias sra filmad baginning on tha 
first paga with a printad or illuatratad impraa- 
aion, and anding on tha last paga with a printad 
or illuatratad impraasion. 



Las axamplairas originaux dont la couvartura an 
papiar ast imprim4a sont filmAs an commancsnt 
par la pramiar plat at an tarminant toit par la 
darniira paga qui comporta una amprsints 
d'!mprassion ou d'illustrstion. soit par la tscond 
plat, salon la cas. Tous las autras axamplairas 
originaux sont filmAa an commandant par la 
pramiAra paga qui comporta una amprainta 
d'imprassion ou d'illustrstion at an tarminant par 
la darniira paga qui comporta una talla 
amprainta. 



Tha laat racordad frama on aach microficha 
shall contain tha symbol ^^ (moaning "CON- 
TINUED"), or tha symbol ▼ (moaning "END"), 
whichavar applias. 

Mapa, platas, charts, ate, may ba filmad at 
diffarant raduction ratios. Thosa too larga to ba 
antiraly includad in ona axposura ara filmad 
baginning in tha uppar laft hand cornar, laft to 
right and top to bottom, as many framas as 
raquirad. Tha following diagrama illustrata tha 
mathod: 



Un das symbolas suivants spparaitra sur la 
darniira imaga da chaqua microficha. salon la 
cas: la symbols — ^ signifia "A SUIVRE", la 
symbols ▼ signifia "FIN". 

Laa cartas, planchas. tablaaux, ate, pauvant atre 
filmte A das taux da reduction diffironts. 
Lorsqua ia documant ast trop grand pour itra 
raproduit an un saul cliche, il ast film* A partir 
da I'angla supAriaur gaucha, da gaucha A droits, 
at da haut an bas, an pranant la nombra 
d'imagas nAcassaira. Las diagrammas suivants 
illuatrant la mAthoda. 



1 2 3 




1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



MldtOCOTY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 



1.0 



LI 



1.25 



1^ 


■ 2.8 


m-5 


IJO 


■^B 


i^ 


1^ 

Li 




1^ 


Its 


Ih 


|2.0 



l£ 




^ /APPLIED IIVMGE Inc 

S7. 1653 East Main Street 

^£ Rochester, New York 14609 USA 

JS (716) 482 - 0300- Ptione 

^5 (716) 288 - 5989 - Fox 



t< 



V f^Vvtl 



i^vCc,^ 






THE WAY OF THE SPIRIT 






■•tt^' 



WORKS BY H. RIDER HAGGARD 






PARLIAMENTARY BLUE-BOOK 

Report to II, M.'s Government on the Salvation Army Colonies 
in the United States, with Scheme of National Land 
Settlement. [Cd. 2562.] 

POLITICAL HISTORY 

Cetewayo and his White Neighbours 

WORKS ON AGRICULTURE, COUNTRY LIFE, 
AND SOCIOLOGY 

Rural England {3 vols.) I A Farmer's Year 

The Poor and the Land j A Gardener's Year 

BOOK OF TRAVEL 

A Winter Pilgrimage 

NOVELS 

Dawn Beatrice 

The Witch's Head Joan Haste 

J5SS Doctor Theme 

Colonel Quaritch, V.C. | Stella Frcgelius 

ROMANCES 



King Solomon's Mines 

She 

Allan Quatermain 

Maiwa's Revenge 

Mr. Meeson's Will 

Allan's Wife 

Cleopatra 

Eric Brighteyes 

Nada the Lily 



Montemma's Daughter 

The People of the Mist 

Heart of the World 

Swallow 

Black Heart and White Heart 

Lysbeth 

Pearl Maiden 

The Brethren 

Aycsha : The Return of She 



(/« collaboraiion luith Andrew Lang): 
The World's Desire 



The Way of the Spirit 



BY 



H. RIDER HAGGARD 

AUTHOR OF "JESS," " STELLA FREGBLIUS," KTC. 



•• Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth ... and walk 
in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine 
eyes J but know thou that for all these things God will 
bring thee into judgment." 

"To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the 
tree of life which is in the midst of the paradise of God." 



TORONTO 
THE MUSSON BOOK COMPANY 

LIMITED 






Printed in Great f ritain 



Iff 




S)ebication 

My dear Kipling, — Both of us believe that there are 
higher aims in life than the weaving of stories well or 
ill, and according to our sepaute occasions strive to fulfil 
this faith. 

Still, when we talked together of the plan of thif tale, 
and when you read the wriUen book, your judgment thereof 
was such as all of us hope for from an honest and 
instructed friend — gener&uy in vain. 

■^ as you found int':r*»st in it, I offer it to you, in 
token of much I cannot write. But you will understand. — 

Ever sincerely yours, 

H. RIDEB HAGGARD. 

To RuDVARD Kipling, Esq. 



DiTCHINGHAM, I^fh AugUSi, IQOJ. 









CONTENTS 



4. 



I 



CHAr. 

PROLOGUE 
I. THE VOICE OF THE SINGING SA 
II. TWO LETTERS - 

III. THE RETURN OF RUPERT - 

IV. A BUSINESS CONVERSATION 
V. THE OINNER-PARTy • 

VI. RUPERT FALLS IN LOVE - 
VII. ENG.iGED - - . . 

Vin. EDITH'S CRUSHED LILIES - 
IX. RIPERT ACCEPTS A MUIION 
X. MARRIED • . . . 

XL AN OFFERING TO THE GODS 
XIL THE WANDERING PLAYERS 
XIH. THE END OF THE FIGHT - 
XIV. MEA MAKES A PROPOSAL - 
XV. RUPERT MAKES OBEISANCE 
XVI. MEANWHILE 
XVII. WELCOME HOME ! - 
XVIII. THE HAPPV, HAPPV LIFE - 
XIX. AFTER SEVEN YEARS - 
XX. REVELATIONS - 
XXL ZAHED 
XXIL EDITH AND MEA 

XXIII. THE WHEEL TURNS • 

XXIV. RENUNCIATION - 



PACK 
II 

31 

35 
45 
53 
63 
76 
88 
102 
116 

'31 
ISO 
162 

173 
186 
199 
217 
229 
246 
262 
272 
288 

3^7 
320 

335 



I 



1 



S; 



t 



V 



AUTHOR'S NOTE 

This tale was written two years ago as the result of 
reflections which occurred to me among the Egyptian 
sands and the empty cells of long-departed anchorites. 

Perhaps in printing it I should ask forgiveness for my 
deviation from the familiar, trodden pathway of adventure, 
smce m the course of a literary experience extending now. 
I regret to say. over more than a quarter of a century, 
often I have seen that he who attempts to step off 
the line chalked out for him by custom or opinion is 
apt to be driven back with stones and shoutings. Indeed 
there are some who seem to think it very imprcer that 
an author should seek, however rarely, to addres/ himself 
to a new line of thought or group of readers. As he 
began so he must go on, they say. Yet I have ventured 
on the history of Rupert Ullershaw's great, and to all 
appearance successful Platonic experiinent, chiefly because 
this problem interested me : Under the conditions in which 
fortune placed him in the East, was he right or wrong in 
cHgmg to an iron interpretation of a vow of his youth 
and to the strict letter of his Western Law? And was he 
bound to return to the English wife who had L-eated him 
so ill, as, in the end, he made up his mind to do ? In 



lO 



autbor's flotc 



short, should or should not circumstances be allowed to 
alter moral cases? 

The question is solved in one way in this book, but 
although she herself was a party to that solution, looking 
at the matter with Mea's eyes it seems capable of a 
different readmg. Still, given a sufficiency of faith, 
I believe that set down here to be the true answer. 
Also, whatever its exact cause and nature, there must be 
something satisfying and noble in utter Renunciation for 
Conscience' sake, even when surrounding and popular 
judgment demands no such sacrifice. At least this is 
one view of Life, its aspirations and possibiUties ; that 
which wearies of its native soil, that which hfts its face 
toward the Stars. 

Otherwise, why did those old anchorites wear the stone 
beds of their cells so thin? Why. in this fashion or in 
that, do their successors still wear them thin everywhere 
in the wide earth, especially in the wise and ancient East ? 
I think the reply is Faith : that Faith which bore Rupert 
and Mea to what they held to be a glorious issue of 
their long probation-that Faith in personal survival and 
reunion, without the support of which in one form or 
another, faint and flickering as it may be. the happiness 
or even the continuance of our human world is so difficult 
to imagine. 

H. R. H. 



r 



THE WAY OF THE SPIRIT 



1/ 



PROLOGUE 

The last pitiful shifts of shame, the last agonised doublings 
of despair when the net is about the head and the victor's 
trident at the throat-who can enjoy the story of such things 
as these? Yet because they rough-hewed the character of 
Rupert Ullershaw. because from his part in them he fashioned 
the steps whereby he climbed to that height of renunciation 
which was the only throne he ever knew, something of it must 
be told. A very Uttle will suffice; the barest facts are all we 
need. 

Upon a certain July evening, Lord and Lady Devene sat at 
dinner alone in a very fine room of a very fine house in 
Portland Place. They were a striking couple, the husband 
much older than the wife ; indeed, he was fifty years of 
age, and she in the prime of womanhood. The face of 
Lord Devene, neutral tinted, almost colourless, was full of 
strength and of a certain sardonic ability. His small 
grey eyes, set beneath shaggy, overhanging eyebrows that 
were sandy-coloured like his straight hair, seemed to pierce 
to the heart of men and things, and his talk, when he had 

II 



la 



Zbc WUi^ Of tbe Spirit 



anything to say upon a matter that moved him, was keen 
and uncompromising. It was a very bitter face, and his 
words were often very bitter words, which seems curious, as 
this man enjoyed good health, was rich, powerful, and set by 
birth and fortune far above the vast majority of other men. 

Yet there were flies in his silver spoon of honey. For 
instance, he hated his wife, as from the first she hated him ; 
for instance, he who greatly desired sons to carry on his 
wealth and line had no children; for instance, his sharp, 
acrimonious intellect had broken through all beliefs and 
overthrown all conventions, yet the ghost of dead belief still 
haunted him, and convention still shackled his hands and 
feet. For he could find no other rocks whereon to rest or 
cling as he was borne forward by the universal tide which at 
last rips over the rough edges of the world. 

The woman, Clara, Lady Devene, was physically magni- 
ficent; tall, with a regal-looking head, richly coloured, ivory- 
skinned, perfectly developed in every part, except perhaps 
her brain; Good-natured, courageous after a fashion, well- 
meaning, affectionate, tenacious of what she had learned in 
youth, but impulsive and quite elementary in her tendencies 
and outlook; one who would have wished to live her own life 
and go her own way like an amiable, high-class savage, 
worshipping the sun and the stars, the thunder and the rain.' 
principally because she could not understand them, and at 
times they frightened her. Such was Clara, Lady Devene. 
She was not imaginative, she lived in the present for the 
present. She never heard the roll of the wheels of Fate 
echoing, solemn and ceaseless, through the thin, fitful turmoil 
of our lives, like the boom of distant battle-guns that shape 



+ 



i" 



the destinies of empires discerned through the bray of brass 
bands upon an esplanade. 

No; Clara was not imaginative, although she had a heart, 
although, for example, from year to year she could grieve over 
the man whom once she had jilted or been forced to jilt (and 
who afterwards died of drink), in order to take her "chance in 
life" and marry Lord Devene whom she cordially disliked; 
whom she knew, moreover, to be self-seeking and cross-souled,' 
as each in hie or her degree were all his race from the first 
remembered Ullershaw down to himself and his collaterals. 
Ultimately, such primitive and unhappy women are apt to 
find some lover, especially if he reminds them of their first. 
Lady Devene had done so at any rate, and that lover, as it 
chanced, was scarcely more than a lad, her husband's heir and 
cousin, a well-meaning but hot-hearted youth, whom she had 
befooled with her flatteries and with hrr beauty, and now 
doted on in a fashion common enough under such circum- 
stances. Moreover, she had been found out, as she was 
bound to be, and the thing had come to its inevitable issue. 
The birds were blind, and Lord Devene was no man to spread 
his nets in vain. 

Lady Devene was not imaginative— it has been said. Yet 
when her husband, lifting a large glass of claret to his lips, 
suddenly let it fall, so that the red wine ran over the white 
table-cloth like new-shed blood upon snow, and the delicate 
glass was shattered, she shivered, she knew net why; perhaps 
because instinct told her that this was no accident, but a 
symbol of something which was to come. For once she heard 
the boom of those battle-guns of Fate above the braying of 
the brass band on her life's tawdry esplanade. There rose in 



M 



XTbe ma^ of tbe Spirit 



her mind, indeed, the words of an old song that she used 
to sing — for she had a beautiful voice, everything about 
her was beautiful— a melancholy old song, which began : 

" Broken is the bowl of life, spilled is its ruby wine ; 
Behind us lie the sins of earth, before, the doom Divine ! " 

It was a great favourite with that unlucky dead lover of hers 
who had taken to drink, and whom she had jilted— before he 
took to drink. The memory disturbed her. She rose from the 
table, saying that she was going to her own sitting-room. 
Lord Devene answered that he would come too, and she 
stared at him, for he was not in the habit of visiting her 
apartments. In practice they had lived separate for years. 



Husband and wife stood face to face in that darkened 
room, for the Irmps were not lit, and a cloud obscured the 
moon which till now had shone through the open windows. 

The truth was out. She knew the worst, and it was 
very bad. 

" Do you mean to murder me ? " she asked, in a hoarse voice, 
for the deaaly hate in the man's every word and movement 
suggested nothing less to her mind. 

" No," he answered ; "only to divorce you. I mean to be 
rid of you-at last. I mean to marry again. I wish to leave 
heirs behind me. Your young friend shall not have my wealth 
and title if I can help it." 

" Divorce me ? You ? You 9 " 

" You can prove nothing against me, Clara, and I shall deny 
everything, whereas I can prove all against you. '.his poor 



prologue 



»5 



l';* 
f 



lad will have to 



marry you. Really I am sorry for him, for 
what chance had he against you ? I do not like to see one of 
my name made ridiculous, and it will ruin him." 

" He shall not marry me," she answered fiercely. " 1 1. vc 
him too well." 

"You can settle that as you like between you. Go back to 
your reverend parent's house if you choose, and take to religion 
You will be an ornament to any Deanery. Or if you do not 
choose-" and with a dim. expressive gesture, he waved his 
hand towards the countless lights of London that glimmered 
beneath them. 

She thought a while, leaning on the back of a chair and 
breathmg heavily. Ihen that elementary courage of hers 
flared up, and she said: 

"George, you want to be free from me. You noticed the 
begmning of my folly and sent us at.oad together; it was all 
another plot-I quite understand. Now, life is uncertain, and 
you have made mine very miserable. If anything should chance 
to happen to me-soon, would there be any scandal? I ask 
It. not tor my own sake, but for that of my old father, and 
my sisters and their children." 

"No," he replied slowly. -In that sad and improbable 
event there would be no scandal. Only foolish birds foul 
their own nests unless they are driven to it." 
Again she was silent, then drew back from him and said • 
" Thank you, I do not think there is anything to add. Go 
away, please." 

"Clara." he answered, in his cold, deliberate voice, "you 
are worn out-naturally. Well, you want sleep, it will be a 
good friend to you to-night. But remember, that chloral 



1 1 



i6 



tTbc may or tbc Spirit 



you are ,o fond of i, dangerous stuff; take enough if you 
Uke, but not too much ! " ^ 

" Yes," she replied heavilv •« t !,««- t i, . 
b«„o.,<H>mJh." " ""• """ »k« enough- 

one of those who recoil from .heir Ruhicon, " "^ "<" 

"Good-bye," he said quickly "1 »m „„• 
Devm» h. .t . 4"">-«iy, I am going down to 

Devene b, the late .„i„, but I shall be back in ,ow„ 
to-morrow moming-t„ see my lawyer » 

do^''^''^.'^ """ "'""'■■''■' ™ ^"e •»■•"'«' «'« .0 the 
door, then through the window-place upwards towards he 

":"""'• "r"'"' *'• "" 'P-'e - » solemn wI^^V 
George," she said, "you know that you are , hundred 

who ZTo r • "" "'''''' ' ™' ^°" -- "»^e mt 

Id then wh "' " """' ^°" """» ' ™ ^-«"' 
and then when you wearied of me, treated me as you have 

kave had no p,ty, so you shall find none. I, i, „o, i rt„ 
r.' '° ^" *"- "« ""•* °f -^ 8-ve, but something witt 



t was morning, a„d Rup„ Kershaw stood at the door 
ofthe Portland Place house, whither he had come to cal u^ 
I-dy Devene .„ who. he brought . birthday gift which held 



•s* 



prologue 



»7 



-. 



saved for months to buy. He was a somewhat rugged-faced lad, 
with frank grey eyes; finely built also, broad-shouldered, long- 
armed, athletic, though in movement slow and deliberate. 
There was trouble in those eyes of his, who already had found 
out thus early in his you'.h that though " bread of deceit is 
sweet to a man, afterwards hi- mouth shall be filled with 
|;ravel." Also, he had other anxieties who was the only son 
and hope of his widowed mother, and of a father, Captain 
UUershaw, Devene's relation, whose conduct had broken her 
heart a id beggared her of the great fortune for which she had 
been married. Now Rupert, the son, had just passed out 
of Woolwich, where, when his feet fell into this bitter snare, 
he had been studying in the hope of making a career foi 
himself in the army. 

Presently .he butler, a dark, melancholy-looking person, 
opened the door, and Rupert saw at once that the man was 
strangely disturbed; indeed4 ^'^ looked as though he had 
been crying. 

"Is Lady Devene in?" Rupert asked as a matter of 
form. 

" In, sir, yes ; she'll never go out no more, except once," 
answered the butler, speaking with a gulp in his throat 
"Haven't you heard, sir, haven't you heard?" he went on 
wildly. 

"Heard what?" gasped Rupert, catching at the door 
frame. 

"Dead, Mr. UUershaw, dead — accident — overdose of 
chloral they say ! His lordship found her an hour ago, and 
the doctors have just left." 



i» xcbe Tnias of tbe Spirit 

Meanwhile, in the room above, Lord Devene stood alone, 
contemplating the still and awful beauty of the dead. Then 
rousmg himself, he took the hearth-brush, and with it swept 
certain frail ashes of burnt paper down between tbe bars of 
the low grate so that they crumbled up ai:d were no more 
seen. 

" I never believed that she would dare to do it," he thought 
to himself. "After all. she had courage, and she was right. I 
am worse than she was-as she would judge. Well, I have 
won ♦he game and am rid of her at last, and without scandal. 
So— let the dead bury their dead ! " 

When Rupert, who had come up Irom Woolwich that 
mormng. reached the little house in Regent's Park, which 
was his mother's home, he found a letter awaiting him. It 
had been posted late on the previous night, and was unsigned 
and undated, but in Clara's h. d, being written on a plain 
sheet and enclosed, as a blind, in a conventional note asking 
him to luncheon. Its piteous, its terrible contents need not 
be described ; suffice it to say that from them he learned all 
the truth. He read it twice, then had the wit to destroy it by 
fire. In that awful hour of shock and remorse the glamour 
and the madness departed from him, and he, who at heart was 
good enough, understood whither they had led his feet. 

After this Rupert Ullershaw was very ill, so ill that he lay in 
bed a long time, wandered in his mind, and was like to die 
But his powerful constitution carried his young body through 
the effects of a blow from which inwardly he never really quite 
recovered. In the end, when he was getting better, he told 
his mother everything. Mrs. Ullershaw was a stron^A reserved 



proloijue ,9 

woman, with a broad, patient face and smooth, iron^rey hair; 

one who had endured much and through it kept her simple' 
/ faith and trust in Providence— yes, even when she thought that 

\ the evil in her son's blood was mastering him, i .c evil from 

', which no Ullershaw was altogether free, and that he was 

^ beginning to walk in the footsteps of his father and of that 

j »" guide and temptti. his cousin. Lord Devene. She heard 

him o«it, her quiet eyes fixed upon his face that was altered 

almosl into age by passion, illness and repentance-heard him 

without a word. 

Then she made one of the great efforts of h.r iife, and in 
the stress of her appeal tven became eloquent. She told 
Rupert all she knew of those brilliant, erratic, unprincipled 
Ullershaws from whom he sprang, and counted before his 
eyes the harvest of Dead Sea apples that they had gathered. 
She showed him how great was his own wrong<loing, and how 
imminent the doom from which he had but just escaped— 
that doom which had destroyed the unhappy Clara after she 
was meshed in the Ullershaw net, and corrupted by their 
example and philosophy which put the pride of life and 
gratification of self above obedience to law human or Divine. 
She pointed out to him that he had received his warning, that 
he stood at the parting of the ways, that his happiness and 
welfare for all time depended upon the path he chose. She, 
who rarely spoke of herself, even appealed to him to remember 
his mother, who had endured so much at the hands of his 
family, and not to bring her grey hairs with sorrow to the 
grave; to live for work and not for pleasure; to shun the 
society of idle folk who can be happy in the midst of cor- 
ruption, and who are rich in everything except good t u . 



•MIMMBlai 



to 



TTbe May of tbe StHdt 



"Set another ideal before your eyes, my ion," the said, "that 
of renunciation, and learn that when you seem to renounce you 
really gain. Follow the way of the Spirit, not that of the 
Flesh. Conquer yourself and the weakness which comes of 
your blood, however hard that may be. Self-denial is not 
really difficult, and its fruits are beautiful ; in them you will 
find peace. Life is not long, my boy, but remorse may be a 
perpetual agony. So live, then, that having obtained forgive- 
ness for what yoi ave done amiss, it may not be there to 
torment you when jou come to die." 

As it chanced, her words fell in a fruitful soil well prepared 
to receive them— a strong soil, also— one which could grow 
corn as well as weeds. 

" Mother," Rupert answered simply, " I will. I swear to you 
tha^ whatever it costs me I will," and stretching out his wasted 
arms he drjw down her grey head and kissed her on the brow. 

This history will show how he kept that sick-bed promise 
under circumstances when few would have blamed him for its 
breacL Romantic as Rup rt Ullershaw's life was destined to 
be, thenceforv/ard it was quite unstained. 



CHAPTER I 



i 



THE VOICE OF THE SINGING SAND 

More than eleven years have gone by, and the scene upon 

which our curtain rises again is different indeed to that upon 

which It fell. In place of that little London house where 

Rupert had lain sick, behold the mouth of a cliff-hewn temple, 

and on the face of it, cut from the solid rock, four colossal 

statues of an Egyptian king, nearly seventy feet high each of 

them, that gaze for ever across the waters of the Nile and the 

desert beyond — that unchanging desert whence for three 

isand five hundred years, dawn by dawn, they have greeted 

. newly-risen sun. For this place is the temple of Abu-Simbel 

I ow the Second Cataract of the Nile in the Soudan. 

: is afternoon in the month of September, of the year 1889 
and beneath one of the colossi near to the entrance of the 
temple is seated a Brtish officer in uniform-a big, bearded 
rugged-faced man, with clear grey eyes, and an expression 
that at this moment, at any rate, would have impressed an 
observer as remarkable for intensity and power. Indeed in 
this respect it was not unlike that stamped upon the stone 
countenances of the mighty statues above him. There was 
in it something of the same calm, patient strength-something 
of that air of contemptuous expectancy with which the old 
Egyptian sculptors had the art of clothing those effigies of 
their gods and kings. 

It would have been hard to recognise in this man the lad 
whom we left recovering from a sore sickness, for some twelve 
yeara of work, thought, strugfie, and self-control -chisels, all 

SI 



37 



tTbe Mai? of tbe Sptrft 



of them, that cut deeply — had made their marks upon him. 
Yet it was Rupert Ullershaw and no other. 

The history of that period of his life can be given in few 
words. He had entered the army and gone to India, and 
t'.icre done very well. Having been fortunate enough to be 
employed in tv. o of our little frontier wars, attention had been 
called to his conspicuous professional abilities. As it chanced 
also he was a studious man, and the fact that he devoted 
himself but little to amusements — save to big-game shooting 
when it came in his way — left him plenty of time for study. 
A chance conversation with a friend who had travelled much 
in the East, and who pointed out to him how advantageous it 
might be for his future to have a knowledge of Arabic, with 
which very few English officers were acquainted at the time, 
caused him to turn his attention to that language. These 
labours of his becoming known to those in authority, the 
Indian Government appointed him upon some sudden need 
to a semi-diplomatic office on the Persian Gulf. Here he did 
well, and although he never got the full public credit of it, 
was fortunate enough to avert a serious trouble that might 
have grown lo large proportions and involved a naval demon- 
stration. In recognition of his services he was advanced in 
rank and made a CE. at a very early age, with the result 
that, had he wished it, he might have entered on a diplomatic 
career with every hope of distinction. 

But Rupert was, above all things, a soldier, so turning his 
back upon these pleasant prospects, he applied to be allowed 
to serve in Egypt, a request that was readily granted on 
account of his knowledge of Arabic. Here in one capacity or 
another he took part in various campaigns, being present at 
the battles of £1-Teb and Tamai, in the latter of which he was 
wounded. Afterwards he marched with Sir Herbert Stewart 
from Dongola and fought with him at Abu Klea. Returning 
to Egypt after the death of Gordon, he was employed as an 
Intelligence officer at Cairo, and finally made a lieutenant- 



^ 



TTbe tt^oice of tbe Sfngind 5an^ 



83 



colonel in the Egyptian army. In this capacity he accom- 
panied General Grenfell up the Nile, and took part in the 
battle of Toski, where the Dervishes were routed on 3rd August, 
1889. Then he was stationed at Abu-Simbel, a few miles 
away, to make arrangements as to the disposal of prisoners, 
and subsequently to carry on negotiations with certain Arab 
chiefs whose loyalty remained doubtful. 

Such is a brief record of those years of the life of Rupert 
Ullershaw, with which, eventful as they were, our story hrs 
nothing to do. He had done exceedingly well ; indeed, there 
were few officers of his standing who could look to the future 
with greater confidence, for although he appeared older than 
his years, he was still a young man ; moreover, he was liked 
and respected by all who knew him, and notwithstanding 
his success, a'most without enemies. It only remains to 
add that he had kept the promise which he made to his 
mother upon his sick-bed to the very letter. Ever since that 
sad first entanglement, Rupert's life had been spotless. 

The sun was beginning to sink, and its rays made red path- 
ways on the flooded Nile, and bathed the desert beyond with 
a tremulous, rosy light, in which isolated mountains, that in 
shape exactly resembled pyramids, stood up here and there 
like the monuments of kings. The scene was extraordinarily 
beautiful ; silent also, for Rupert had pitched his camp, and 
that of his small escort, half a mile away further up the river. 
As he watched, the solemnities of the time and place sank into 
his heart, stilling the transient emotions of the moment, and 
tuning his mind until it was in key with its surroundings, an 
instrument open to the subtle influences of the past and 
future. 

Here in the shadow of the mighty works of men who had 
been dead for a hundred generations, and looking out upon 
the river, the desert, and the mountains, which to them must 
have seemed as unutterably ancient as they did to him this 
day, his own absolute insignificance came home to Rupert 



24 



TTbc mws of tbc Spirit 



as perhaps it had never done before. He thought of his petty 
strivings for personal advancement, and a smile grew upon his 
face like the smile upon that of the god-king above him. Through 
the waste of all the weary ages, how many men, he wondered, 
even in this desolate spot, had brooded on the hope of such 
advantage, and gone forth, but few to triumph, the most to fail, 
and all of them to learn within some short years that failure 
and success are one when forgetfulness has covered them. 
Thus the warning of the past laid its heavy hand upon him 
and pressed his spirit down, and the sound of the Ni'e flowing 
on, flowing ever from the far-off mountains of its birth through 
the desert to the sea, murmured in his ear that like those of 
Job, his days were "swifter than a post," sung in his ear the 
song of Koholeh : Vanity of vanities : all is vanity. 

Rupert grew sad as the shadow of the hills which gathered 
deep about him, empty and desolate of mind as the vast, 
deserted temple at whose mouth he sat, the fane of a faith 
that was more dead than were its worshippers. Then suddenly 
he remembered how that morning at the dawn he had seen 
those cups of shadow filled with overflowing light, and how by 
it on the walls of that very temple he had read prayers of faith 
and affirmations strangely certain, of the eternity of all good 
works and the resurrection of all good men, in which they 
who carved them five-and-thirty centuries before, believed as 
firmly as he believed to-day. 

Now it was the future that spoke to him as his heart took 
hope once more. Oh ! he knew full surely— it came upon him 
with a strange conviction— that though many troubles and 
much bitterness might await him, though he might be born to 
sorrows as the sparks fly upwards, yet he should not live use- 
lessly, or endure death in vain, that no life, not even that of 
the ant which toiled ceaselessly at his side in the yellow sand, 
was devoid of purpose or barren of result; that chance and 
accident did not exist; that every riddle had its answer, and 
every pang its issue in some new birth; that of the cloth of 



V 



I 



TTbc Wotcc of tbe Sittfliitfl Sanb »$ 

thoughts and deeds which he wove now would be fashioned 
the garment that he must wear hereafter. 

Thus brooded Rupert Ullershaw after his fashion when 
alone, as indeed he loved to be, for he was a man who faced 
things and found truth oftenest in solitude. 

Tired of these reflections, natural as they might be in 
such a time and spot, at length he rose, went a few paces to 
look at the lonely grave of a comrade whose working day was 
over, then with a sigh bethought him that now the afternoon 
was cooler, he woul ' take some exercise before the dark- 
ness fell. Rupert loved all the sights and sounds of Nature, 
and remembering that the sunset would be fine seen from the 
top of liff behind him, he set to work to toil up the steep 
slope ot sand, following a little track made by the jackals 
from the river-bank to their holes in the rocks, for he knew 
that these cunning animals would choose the easiest path. 

Reaching the crest at length, he paused a while to look at 
the endless desert and the fiery ball of the sun sinking towards 
It so swiftly that he could almost see it move, as it does, or 
seems to do in Egypt. It was going down behind two distant 
solitary mountains; indeed, for a few seconds, perhaps a 
mmute, its great red globe seemed to rest upon the very point 
of one of these mountains. Contemplating it and th m, he 
recalled a legend which an old Arab had told him, that beyond 
those mountains was a temple larger and finer than Abu- 
Simbel. He had asked how far it was away and why no one 
went there, and learned that it was a great distance off, deep 
in the de -rt, and that if anyone looked upon it he died, for 
it was the home of magicians who did not call on Allah and 
rejected his prophet. Therefore no one did look, only the 
legend remained, which, the Arab had added, without doubt 
was true. 

Forgetting the tale of this fabled temple, Rupert pursued 
his walk past the graves of some of the Khalifa's emirs who 
had been wounded in the battle of Toski, a few miles away 



a6 



TTbc TOUs of tbe Spirit 



and wnen th«y succumbed, hastily buried where they died by 
their retreaHng comrades. He knew the man who lay beneath 
one of those rough piles of stones— a brave Dervish of high 
rank, who had very nearly put an end to himself and his 
earthly adventures. He could see the fellow coming at him 
now, yellmg his war-cry and shaking his great spear. Luckily 
he had his revolver in his hand and was able to shoot before 
that spear fell. The bullet struck his enemy somewhere in 
the head, for he saw the blood appear and the man reel 
Off from him as though he were drunk. Then he lost 
sight of him in the turmoil and slaughter, but afterwards was 
told that he died upon the retreat, and was shown his grave 
by a prisoner who had helped to bury him. 

Whilst he was regarding it with the respect that one brave 
man has for another, even though that other be a cruel and 
fanatical heathen, Rupert became aware of a shadow falling 
upon him, which, from its long, ugly shape, he knew must 
be cast by a camel. Turning, he perceived a white dromedary 
bearing down upon him swiftly, its soft, sponge-like hoofs 
making so little noise upon the sand that he had never heard 
It coming. On the back of the camel sat an Arab sheik, who 
hela three spears in his hand, one large and two small. 
Suispecting a sudden attack, as well might happen to him in 
that lonely place at the hands of a fanatic, he sprang back 
behind the grave and drew his pistol, whereon the man called 
out to him to put it up in the name of God as he came in 
peace, not war. 

"Dismount," answered Rupert sternly, "and throw down 
your spears." 

The Arab stopped his dromedary, commanded it to kneel 
ana slipping from the saddle, laid down the spears and 
bowed himself humbly. 

"What are your name and business," asked Rupert, "and 
why do you come on me thus alone ? " 

"Bey," he answered, "I am Ibrahim, the Sheik of the 



t 



f* 



TTbe it^ofce of tbe Sfnoittd San^ 



a? 



' ''.I 



v',^ 






Land of the Sweet Wells out yonder. I came to your camp 
with my attendants, and being told that you were here upon 
the hill-top, followed to speak with you, if it pleases you to 
open your ears to me." 

Rupert studied his visitor. He was a very handsome but 
cruel-looking man of about forty years of age, with flashing 
black eyes, a hooked nose, and a short, pointed beard which 
had begun to turn grey. 

"I know you," he said. "You are a traUor to the 
Government of Egypt, from which you have taken many 
benei;.,. You received the Khalifa's General, Wad en- 
NeguMii, and supplied him with food, water, and camels. 
Had it not been for you, perhaps he could not have 
advanced, and had it not been for you, many more of his 
people must have been captured. How dare you show your 
face to me ? " 

"Bey," said the Sheik humbly, "that story is not true. 
What I did for AbduUahi's soldiers, I did because I must, 
or die. May his name be accursed ! " and he spat upon the 
ground. " Now I conje to seek justice from you, who have 
power here." 

"Go on," said Rupert; "you shall have justice, I promise 
you — if I can give it." 

" Bey, a detachment of the Egyptian troops mounted upon 
camels have swept down upon me and robbed me. They 
have taken away all my sheep and most of the dromedaries, 
and killed three of my people who strove to protect them. 
More, they have insulted my women— yes, they, those dogs 
of Fellaheen. In the name of Allah, I pray you order that 
my property should be restored, or if you cannot do so, 
write to Cairo on my behalf, for I am a true man, and the 
Khedive is my lord and no other " 

" Yet," answered Rupert, ' t. Sheik I^ahim, I have seen 
a certain letter written by to tae u..postor, AbduUahi, 

the Khalifa, in which you . ,r him assistance, should he 



*9 



Ttbc Mfcs ot tbc Spirit 



m^de Egypt and take the road that run, past the Sweet 

sullX''"' '''' ''"* '"^''' '"'''' "'' '"^^'•" ^^ «»'^ 

it ^''^^Tl'T"^' ^°'' *'°'"^' '* *^^* y°" '^no^ anything about 
t? asked Rupert. "Get you back to your t ibe and be 
thankf 1 that, now the Khedive . victorious, his soldiers d^ 
not take you as well as your sheep. Know that you are a 
man with a mark against his name, and bear yourself more 
fa.thfully lest this should be your lot "-and with his fooThe 

T. c^^l'"""'' "' ^'^ ^""' ^"°^^ -hich they talked. 

The Sheik made no answer. Going to his dromedary he 
chmbed into the saddle, bade the beast rise, and rodToff 
a httle way. At a distance of about forty yards, which 
doubtless he judged to be out of revolver shot, he halted 
and began a furious tirade of abuse 
J Infidel dog ! "he shouted, with some added insults directed 
agamst Rupert's forbears; "y, , who stand there with your 
defiling foot upon the grave of the true believer whom you 
k.lled. hear me. You refuse me justice and accuse me of 
having helped the Khalifa. Be careful lest I should help him 
I who am the Sheik of the Territories of the Sweet wt^ he 

Tr^stra 'h'' :VT ^° '^'^ ^^y^' -''^ fiftyru'and 
dervishes at his back, who will not be fool enough to march 

boats My tnbe is a strong one. and we live in a mountainous 

FeUahTJ f T "' ''""°' '^ '"'■'^^'' ^^°"^h >^°- hounds o 
Fellaheen took us unawares the other day. Oh ! be careful 

kst should catch you. white Bey. whose face I shaHo 

forget. If ever I do. I will pay you back for the affront you 

pu upon me. a true man. I swear it by my fathei^s head 

Yes, then you shall choose between the faith and death • then 

you shall acknowledge that Mahomet is the prophet of kllah 

you Cross-worshipping infidel, and that he whom you name an 

impostor shall drive you and all your foul race in4 the sea " 



^ 



-i 

> 



t 



</ 



Ubc IDofcc ot tbe Singino Sanb ag 

" You forget yourself, Sheik of the Sweet Wells," answered 
Rupert quietly, " and forget also that the future is the gift of 
God and not shaped by man. Begone, now! Begone at once, 
lest I, too, grow angry and summon my soldiers to take you ar 1 
throw you in prison where you deserve to be. Off, and let me 
see your face no more, you who dare to threaten your sovereign, 
for I think that when we meet again it will be the herald of 
your death." 

Ibrahim sat up upon his camel and opened his mouth to 
answer, but there was something in the stern, fateful bearing 
of the Englishman which seemed to quiet him. At any rate, 
he turned the beast and urging it to a trot, departed smftly 
across the desert. 

" A very dangerous man," reflected Rupert. " I will report 
the matter at once and have him looked after. I wish they 
had left his sheep alone and taken him, as no doubt he knows 
I said that they ought to do. Somehow, I don't feel as though 
I had seen the last of that fellow." Then dismissing the 
matter of this rebel sheik from his mind, he continued his walk 
and crossed the mountain plateau. 

Presently Rupert came to the path by which he intended to 
descend. It was a strange one, none other indeed than a 
perfect waterfall of golden sand set at so steep an angle that the 
descent of it appeared dangerous, if not impossible, as would 
doubtless be the case had that slope been of rock. Being 
of sand, however, the feet of the traveller sink into it and so 
keep him from slipping. Then, if he is fortunate, for this 
thmg does not always happen, he may enjoy a curious 
experience. As he moves transversely to and fro across the 
face of the slide, all about him the sand begins to flow like 
water, till at length it pours itself into the Nile below and is swept 
away. More, as it flows it sings, a very wild song, a moaning, 
melancholy noise that cannot be described on paper, which is 
caused, they say, by the vibration of the mountain rocks 
beneath the weight of the rolling sand. From time to time 



30 



TTbc Mas of tbc Splrtt 



Rupert paused in his descent and listened to this strange, 
thnlhng sound until it died away altogether, when wearying of 
the amusement, he scrambled down the rest of the hill-side 
and reached the bank of the Nile. 

Here his reflections were again brok&n in upon, this time 
by a woman. Indeed he had seen ner as he descended, 
and knew her at once for the old gipsy *ho for the past year 
or two had lived in a hovel close by, and earned, or appeared 
to earn her living by cultivating a strip of land upon the 
borders of the Nile. As it chanced, Rupert had been able a 
month or so before to secure repayment to her of the value of 
her httle crop which had been eaten up by the transport 
animals, and the restoration of her milch goats that the soldiers 
had seized. From that moment the old women had been his 
devoted friend, and often he would spend a pleasant hour in 
talking to her in her hut, or while she laboured in her 
garden. 

To look at, Bakhita, for so she was named, was a curious 
person, quite distinct from the Eg>'ptian and Soudanese women, 
being tall, thin, very light-coloured for an Eastern, with well- 
cut features and a bush of snow-white hair which hung down 
upon her shoulders. Indeed she was so different from them- 
selves that she was known as the Gipsy by all the natives in the 
district, and consequently, of course, credited with various 
magical powers and much secret knowledge-with truth in the 
latter case, 

Rupert greeted her in Arabic, which by now he spoke 
extraordmarily well, and held out his hand for her to shake. 
She took it, and bending down touched it with her lips. 

" I was waiting for you, my father," she said. 

"Supposing you call me 'your son,'" he answered, laughing 
with a glance at her white locks. 

"Oh!" she replied, "some of us have fathers that are not 
of the flesh. I am old, but perhaps your spirit is older than 
mine." 



Zbc Dolce of tbc Sittdfttd SMb 31 

" All things are possible," said Rupert gravely. " But now. 
what is the business ? " 

•'I fear I am too late with my business," she answered. 
"I came to warn you against the Sheik Ibrahim, who passed 
my hut a little while ago on his way to visit you at your camp. 
But you have already seen him, have you not ? " 

" Yes, Bakhita ; but how do you know that ? " 

"Oh!" she replied evasively; "I heard his angry voice 
commg down the wind from the top of yonder hill. I think 
that he was threatening and cursing you." 

Rupert nodded. 

"I am sorry. I have known this man from childhood and 
his father before him, for he has done much hurt to my people, 
and would do more. That is why I live here ; to watch him. 
He IS a very evil man, cruel and full of the spirit of revenge. 
Also, It would have been well to speak him soft, for his tribe is 
Strong and he may give trouble to the Government. It is true 
as he says, that the soldiers did handle him with roughness^ 
for one of them had grudges against him." 

•' What is said, is said," answered Rupert indifferently. "But 
tell me, mother, how do you come to know so much— about 
many things ? " 

"I ? Oh ! I sit by the river and listen, and the river tells 
me Its tidmgs-tidings from the north, tidings from the south : 
the nver tells me all. Although you white men cannot hear it, 
that old river has a voice for those whose ears are opened." 

" And how about tidings from east and west where the river 
does not run ? " asked Rupert, smiling. 

" Tidings from the east and west ? Oh ! thence and thither 
bio., ^e winds, and those whose eyes are opened, see more in 
them than dust. They have their voices too, those old, old 
winds, and they tell me tales of the kings of my people who 
are dead, and of the loves and wars of long ago." 

Rupert laughed outright. 

"You are a very clever woman, mother," he said ; " but be 



3« 



TTbe TiQUy of tbe Spirit 






careful that they don't arrest you as a Mahdist spy. for you 
wont be able to call the Nile and the Campsine wind a. 

Wl(Qc8S6Sa 

"Ah! you laugh at me," she answered, shaking her old 
head ; but you wonderful white folk have still much to learn 
from the East that was grey with time when the first of your 
forefathers yet lay within the womb. I tell you, Rupert Bey. 
that all Nature has its voices, and that some of them speak of 
the past, some of the present, and some of the future. Yes • 
even that moving sand down which you climbed but now 
has Its own voice." 

" I know that well enough, for I heard it, but I can't expUin 
to you the reason in Arabic." 

" You heard it j yes. and you would tell me that it is caused 
by sand rubbmg up against ^ocks, or by rocks singing to the 
sound of the sand like a harp to the wind, and so. without 
doubut IS. You heard the voice, wise white father, but tell 
me, did you understand its talk ? Listen ! " she went on, with- 
out waiting for an answer. " I, seated here watching you as 
you climbed, I heard what tbe sand said about you and others 
with whom your life has to do. Oh, no; I am not a common 
fortune-teller. I do not look ,. .nds and make squares in 
the dust, or throw bones and pebbles, or gaze into pools of 
ink. Yet sometimes when the voice speaks to me, then I 
know, and never so well as of him whose feet are set upon the 
Singing Sand." 

" Indeed, mother ; and what was its song of me ? " 
"I shall not tell you," she answered, shaking her head. 
It IS not lawful that I should tell you, and if I did. you 

would only set me down as a common cheat-of whom 

theie are many." 

" What had the song of the sand to say of me ? " he repeated 
carelessly, for he was only half-listening to her talk 

"Much, Rupert Bey," she answered; ««much that is sad 
and more that is noble." 



1 

/I) 



We woiee of tbe sinfline S»m ^, 

•hen checW birn^V InVJS ' 'tI, T''«''.^" ""■ 
<lo)rou know of the lost temDl.!nih.H '' ^"'"»' ""»' 

•nother question : "wntive, and answered him with 

doZTnow"? " ""'' """"""« "' ■■'• 'f " « -«. P But wh« 

■■.:!d;::rtS,!;nV:r:"rt.^''''''»-- 

and we will see." *" so grateful. Come to my hut 

-p";"-; WetiJrrnno*'""^ *° """^^ '» -^ 
" Veiy well another . i J! .. ^ "°"'' Bakhita." 

vi.i.tJte4 toXr wL c r™?' r"'"' •« "-y 

you wm have Jetted to ead"l' ,^," «'' »•" J. ^k that 

IA..-I" and she held % herlT"?'^ ""I "'"'"«• 
towards the river. '"'' •»"' •>« bead 

"Xo°u?'ireZ:rt^''°''''"«-"'''-""^- 

Nonsense!" said Rupert "T rf««.. 
week." ^ ^" ' oon t expect her for a 

•' People often get what they don't exoect " ^h. 
"Good-night, RuperfBev I All thJ T i ^''^ ^swered. 
Egypt have you ,^n thSr kee^L t n^ ' '^'' '''' ''"^ '" 

Then she turned wi.hn. . ^ '" ""^ '"^^t ^e^^-" 
the risen moTbl" t ,1"^""^^^ '^ ^'^^ ^'^''t of 
rocks fallen from thT cliff ff:,hT ,"'" '"'"^^ ^'"^"g the 
flooded Nile, till Jl! tL^^ "uXTnth't' °^ ^^^ 

iunner north she passed 
c 



34 TTbe TPOay of tbe Spirit 

through the fence of her garden and came to her own mud 

hut. 

Here Bakhita sat down on the ground by it« door, and was 
very thoughtful whilst she awaited the coming of the steamer, 
of which either her own ears or perhaps some traveller had 
warned her. For Bakhita also expected a letter, or, at any rate, 
a message, and she was thinking of the writer or the sender. 

" A mad whim," she said to herself. " Had not Tama 
wisdom enough of her own, which comes to her with her 
blood, that she needs must go to learn that of these white 
people, and to do so, leave her high place to mix even with 
the daughters of Fellaheen, and hide her beauty behind the 
yashmak of a worshipper of the false Prophet ? Surely the god 
of our fathers must have struck her mad, and .'ow she is in great 
danger at the hands of thatd'<g Ibrahim. Yet, who knows ? 
This madness may be true wisdom. Oh 1 there are things too 
high for me, nor can my skill read all her fate. So here at 
my post I bide to watch and learn as I was bidden." 



CHAPTER II 



TWO LETTERS 

When Rupert reached his camp beyond the great ti^mnU », 
^d J'*r*""* of his guard whether te^tilTbrahim 
tZZlZtt '''-'''''' -^-o«^'erar,sL?;ta"; 
■' He mu« have been walching to find me alone • luck. I 

inen he ate his dinner, and afterwarH« ,<,* a^ 

a report of this and other matter! To h ''" *"^ '^^^ 

A. k. « • u J . niatters to his superiors in Cairo 

She proved to be a Government boat from AsM„a„ 

jnd pHr:t-%to;r-oroa^ -?„'t: 

It was characteristic of Rupert that he read the deTpatlhes' 

35 



36 



Uhc Mar of tbe Spirit 



officer who brought them would stay to carry on his work 
at Abu-Simbel. 

As the boat was to start down Nile at dawn, Rupert spent 
most of the night in making arrangements with his successor, 
and in instructing him as to the political position. When this 
duty was finished, and the company of soldiers had been dis- 
embarked and camped, his own packing claimed attention, so 
that, in the end, he did not get aboard the steamer till nearly 
four o'clock in the morning — that is, about an hour before 
she cast off. Going at once to his cabin, Rupert opened his 
mother's envelope, to find that the letter within was written 
with pencil, and in a very shaky hand. Consumed by 
anxiety, he began to read. It ran as follows : — 

•' My Dearest Son, — My last letter to you was that which 
I wrote to say how thankful I was to hear that by God's mercy 
you had safely passed the great dangers of the battle of Toski, 
and the delight with which I saw you so favourably spoken of 
in the official despatches reporting the victory. 

"That was five weeks ago, and I have not written since 
because, dear Rupert, I have been somewhat seriously ill and 
was not able to do so. Nor would I let anyone else write lest 
you should be frightened. One night, Rupert, whilst reading 
my Bible before going to bed, a very strange feeling suddenly 
came over me, and I remember no more for two days. When 
I recovered consciousness the doctor told me that I had had a 
stroke, I could not quite make out of what kind, nor does it 
matter. He added, not then but afterwards, that for a while 
my condition was precarious, and intimated to me that although 
all danger had passed for the present and I might live for years, 
this was without doubt a warning. Of course I understood 
what he meant and asked no more. 

•• My dearest boy, as you know, I do not fear death, especially 
if it should come in so merciful a form. But on the other 
hand, I do not wish to die without seeing you again. So, if it 



KW'^ 



XTwo Xctters 



37 



is possible, and your career will not be greatly injured thereby, 
I write to ask you tc come to Engl?.r. J js soon as you can, 
for, Rupert, it is now well over eleven .ears since you left home, 
during all which time I have not -.cri your Jac. except in 
dreams. 

" I cannot write much, for my left arm is paralysed, and all 
that side of my body very stiff and helpless, which makes it 
difficult for me to sit up, so I am asking your cousin, Edith 
Bonnythorne, to tell you what news there is. One piece, 
however, I must mention, since a young woman might not like 
to speak of it in writing to a gentleman. 

"There has been another of those sad disappointments in 
Lord Devene's family, the sixth, I think, since his re-marriage. 
This time the child, a boy, was born at seven months. Every 
possible effort was made to save his life; indeed I am told 
that the poor little thing was put into a kind of incubator, the 
latest invention, which is said to be very successful in such 
cases. But it was of no use, the child died. So, although I 
know you care nothing about it, you are once more his heir, 
and I think likely to remain so. 

" Poor Lady Devene has been to see me. She is a good 
sort of woman, although very narrow in her religious views. 
I think she calls herself a Calvinist (fancy his marrying a 
Calvinist !). She grieves more over the fact that the child was 
not christened than because of its sad death. Indeed, speaking 
half in German and half in English, as is her way when moved, 
she said right out that she believed it died because Lord Devene 
would not have the ceremony performed lest it should catch 
a chill, and added that she was sure no child of theirs would 
ever live unless her husband abandoned his godless and free- 
thinking ways. Lastly, she declared that she wished she had 
never married him, but supposed that it was so ordained in 
punishment of her sins, the worst of which was that being 
dazzled by the prospect of so brilliant a match, she had 
accepted what he told her about his religious principles 



38 



Ube Wia,^ ot tbe Spirit 



without satisfying herself that he spoke the truth. I hear that 
there was a great quarrel between them as to this matter of 
the christening, in which she seems to have had the best of it, 
although he would not give way, for Tabitha (that is her name) 
is very stolid and strong-willed when she likes. At any rate, 
he lost his temper and became violent, saying he wished that 
either she or he were dead, to which she answered that sAe 
did not take chloral. I tell you all this because I think you 
ought to know. It is a sad story, and I cannot help believing 
that there is something in wnat poor Lady Devene says. Do 
try to come to see me, my dearest, dearest Rupert. — Your 
ever loving mother, 

" Mary Ullershaw." 



Rupert was deeply moved by the contents of this letter. 
His mother was the one being whom he really loved upon 
earth ; and although of course he always contemplated such 
a possibility in a vague fashion, the fact that she m ght die at 
any moment, that she had indeed been very near to death, 
absolutely overwhelmed him. He had never taken any leave 
heretofore : first, because he shrank from returning to 
England and the inevitable meeting with Lord Devene, and 
secondly, for the reason that his career had moved forward so 
rapidly from point to point and from place to place, that at no 
given time had it been convenient so to do without the loss of 
some considerable opportunity. 

Now he knew that in this matter he had been wrong and 
selfish, also that it might be too late to repair his fault. 
Rupert determined then and there that he would sail for 
home by the first steamer, even if he had to resign his 
commission in the Egyptian Army in order to do so. His 
mind made up on this point, he took up the second envelope 
directed in clear and fastidious-looking writing to Lieutenant- 
Colonel Ullershaw, C.B., D.S.O., etc., etc., Egyptian Army. 

" Well, she has got it all in— just like Edith," he thought 



^wo HLettecs 



39 






> 



! 



to himself, as his eye fell upon this somewhat elaborate 
superscription. Then he opened and read the letter. 

Like all that came from her — and he received several 
every year, since it seemed that Edith Bonnythorne did not 
wish her absent relative to forget her — it was long, well- 
balanced and worded, giving the idea that it had been 
carefully composed and perhaps copied. It began with 
warm congratulations to her dear Cousin Rupert .upon his 
escape from harm in the battle of Toski, of which she 
said she had read the accounts with her heart in her mouth, 
and on the credit that he had won, which, she added, made 
her even prouder of him than she had been before. 

Then it told him all the details of his mother's illness, 
whereof the issue, she said, had been awaited with the 
greatest anxiety, since, for a few hours, it was thought that 
she must die. 

Next she passed on to general news, informing him that 
horse-racing, gambling debts and c'^neral extravagance had 
involved Dick Learmer, who war 'sin of both of them, 

in such difficulties that bankruj. oceedings had been 

commenced against him. In tne end, however, Lord 
Devene had come to the rescue and compounded with 
his creditors. Moreover, he had appointed him his private 
secretary, with good pay— for he earned nothing at the Bar— 
and as he was a capital speaker and popular, talked of 
putting him up to contest, in the Liberal interest, that 
division of the county in which the Devene estates were 
situated, as he disliked the sitting member, a Conservative, 
and wished to oust him. 

"So," added Edith, "Dick has fallen on his feet again 
when it seemed all over with him. I confess that I am 
glad both for his own sake and because these family scandals 
are very disagreeable." 

Lord Devene himself, she continued, was in a dreadful 
state of mind over the death of the baby boy. Indeed she 



/ •"■ 



l.i 



u : 



40 



TEbe ma^ ot tbe Spirit 



could never have believed that anything would have moved 
him so much. Also, his domestic relations appeared to be 
very unhappy, as he and his wife constantly quarrelled 
over religious questions. What was more, on the whole she 
had the best of it, since his gibes and sarcasms took not the 
slightest effect upon her and she seldom lost her temper. 
What would be the end of it Edith could not guess, but he 
was growing to look quite old and i'l. The letter ended jy 
imploring Rupert to come home to visit his mother, whom 
otherwise he might not see again, and to rest a little while 
after so many years of hard work. Further, it would, she 
was sure, be to his interest to make the acquaintance of the 
leading people in London, who were always ready to push 
on a successful man with good social and professional 
prospects if only they remembered that he existed. 

Rupert laid this letter down by that from his mother 
and began to think, for he was too tired and excited with 
various emotions to be able to sleep. 

He remembered the last time that he had seen Edith 
Bonnythorne and Dick Learmer. It was when he was lying 
ill after that terrible affair many years before. They were both 
of them second cousins of his own and of each other, being, 
like all the rest of the family, descendants by the male or 
female side of the old Ullershaw who had married a brewer's 
heiress, and accumulated the vast fortune that was now in the 
possession of Lord Devene. Edith was the daughter of a 
certain Mr. Bonnythorne, a High-Church clergyman, who went 
over to Rome, into a monastery irdeed, and died there. The 
wife from whom he had separated some time before he took 
this step, it was said because of her friendship with her relative, 
Loid Devene, of whom Mr. Bonnythorne disapproved, was a 
woman of extraordinary beauty, charm, and wit, but she also 
had died long ago. 

Dick Learmer, the next heir to the entailed Devene wea'ih 
after Rupert himself, though the title would not descend to 



TTwo Xetterd 



4t 



him under the special remainders of the original Patent, was 
the son of a Chancery barrister of Spanish extraction, whose 
family, the real name of which was Lerma, had been naturalised 
in England for some generations. This Mr. Learmer had died 
young, leaving his wife, another of the UUershaws, and his 
son Richard virell provided for, but no more. After her 
mother's death, Edith Bonnythorne, who had nothing, went to 
live with the widowed Mrs. Learmer, and thus it came about 
that she and Dick were brought up very much together. It 
was said, or so Rupert had heard, that the childless Lord 
Devene wished to take her into his own house, but that 
his first wife, Clara, refused to receive her, which was one 
of the causes cf the estrangement between her and her 
husband. 

Rupert could recall, with great distinctness, the appearance 
of Dick Learmer and Edith Bonnythorne as they had stood 
beside his bedside all those years ago. At that time Dick was 
in his twenty second year. First he had intended to be a doctor, 
but after a while gave up medicine and began to eat his dinners 
for the Bar, to which profession he now belonged. He was 
then a dissipated and extravagant young man, but singularly 
handsome, and very popular among women. Perhaps they 
admired his fin^ dark and rather languid eyes, shaded by long 
lashes, his oval face and richly-coloured complexion, and his 
curling chestnut hair, all of r;hich he had inherited with his 
Spanish blood. Or his somewhat sentimental yet passionate 
disposition, and the readiness of his address may have 
appealed to them. At any rate, they liked him, and his cousin, 
Edith Bonnythorne, then still a school-girl, was no exception 
to this rule, although even at that age she knew his faults and 
would lecture him upon them. 

She had been a beautiful child, this Edith, with her tall 
figure and light, graceful carriage, so much so that people often 
turned to look at her ; very regular features, delicately-arched 
eyebrows, a broad forehead, upon which the rippling hair of 



42 



Tlbe Mas of tbe Spirit 



s 



reddish gold grew low; large dark blue eyes, somewhat heavy- 
lidded ; a perfectly chiselled nose and mouth, with red lips 
that opened a little over the white teeth when she smiled ; 
small feet and hands, tapering fingers and almond-shaped nails. 
Such was Edith's appearance as Rupert remembered her. 

Well, he must go home j he must see all these people, which, 
with the exception of his mother, was the last thing that he 
wished to do. Their lives and his, which had diverged so 
widely, were about to cross again, so, continuing this line of 
thought, he set himself to recollect what he had heard of them 
of ?ate years. After all, it was not much, for he had never made 
any inquiries. 

Lord Devene's second wife, whom he married within ten 
months of Clara's death, was, he understood, a German of 
good family, who had filled the place of companion to a dowager 
lady of title. He had married her, so Rupert heard, on what 
he called scientific principles ; in short, because German women 
were supposed to be models of the domestic virtues. But why 
she had married Lord Devene he had no idea, unless it were 
because he was Lord Devene. The results had not been 
quite satisfactory ; indeed, as these letters showed, marriage on 
scientific principles had, in this case, proved a dismal failure. 

Of course all this was much to his own temporal advantage, 
but the fact gave Rupert little joy ; indeed, he would have been 
glad without reservation if his cousin Devene were at that 
moment the father of a flourishing family of sons. He did not 
want to succeed to the wealth and title, should he live to do so ; 
he had no Uking for this kind of inherited pomp which he had 
done nothing to earn, or for the life that it would involve. 
With the mysterious sixth sense, which most of us have in 
greater or less degree, he understood, indeed he was sure, that 
these honours and riches would bring him no happiness ; 
moreover, for reasons that the reader can guess, he detested 
the very name of Devene. Still this was the present situation, 
and he could only hope that it might change. 



Uwo Xetters 



43 



^ 



For the rest, his cousin, the handsome, pleasure-ioving, 
sensuous-natured, and unprincipled Dick Learmer, of whom 
Edith spoke in her letter, had so far closely followed the 
course which he would have predicted for him. On his 
mother's death he had come into his moderate fortune of 
about ^i,ooo a year, and dissf.ated it with graceful ease. 
Now he was hanger-on and head bottle-washer to Lord 
Devene, the worst fate, Rupert reflected, that could befall 
most men, and one that was in no way improved by the 
prospect of becoming a dummy member of Parliament; a 
puppet who must dance in whatever fashion pleased his 
patron and paymaster. Rupert remembered also that some 
years before he had heard talk of an engagement between 
Dick and their cousin Edith. If there was ever any truth 
in this rumour, evidently it had come to nothing. Probably 
there was some truth once, for he remembered that even when 
she was still a girl Dick always appeared to be attached to 
Edith, an affection which she seemed to reciprocate. Doubt- 
less if this surmise were correct, she had shown her good 
sense by putting an end to the affair when she came to know 
the man's true character. 

As for Edith herself, by an arrangement, of which he did 
not quite understand the details, but that seemed to be 
convenient to them both, financially and otherwise, for the 
last five yerrs she had been living in his mother's house, 
whither she migrated on the death of Mrs. Learmer. Although 
in her letters to him his mother never wrote of her with 
enthusiasm, on the other hand, she never complained of her, 
unless it were a complaint to say that Edith seemed dissatisfied 
with her prospects and position in life, which, she added, was 
not wonderful when her great beauty and considerable talents 
were taken into account. How did it happen, Rupert 
wondered, that a person who was said to be so lovely, and, 
to judge from her photographs, with justice ; so clever also, 
nad rcacucd her present age without iriftrrying ? Probably it 



44 



Zbc TRflay of tbc Spirit 



was because she had met nobody whom she cared about, and 
If so, this did credit to her heart, as the breaking off of her 
relations with Dick, if they ever existed, had done to her 
common-sense. 

Well, doubtless he would soon find out all about these 
matters for himself, and— the steamer was starting With a 
sigh Rupert put his letters into his pocket and went on deck, 
m the east the sun rose, a huge, golden ball, and its straight, 
powerful rays struck full on the colossi seated above the door 
of Abu-Simbel, and penetrated in spears of light far into the 
temple s mysterious and pillared depths. As they smiled on 
him when first he saw them, so those solemn, stony giants 
smiled on him in farewell. He wondered whether he would 
ever look on them again, these hoary monuments that had 
stared their adieux to so many generations of Egyptians, 
Greeks, Romans, Persians, Saracens, and Christian men. 
He did not know, and yet again that sixth sense told him 
that he would. So did old Bakhita, for when a few minutes 
afterwards they steamed past her hut, she stood upon the bank 
and called to him : 

"Farewell, Rupert Bey! farewell for a little while-till you 
come once more I " 

He waved his hand and watched her tall figure until a bend 
of the river hid it, then, feeling drowsy at last, Rupert went 
into his cabin and lay down to sleep. 



r 



m. 

1) 



CHAPTER III 

THE RETURN OF RUPERT 

On one very dreary day in late September, Rupert, after an 
absence of nearly twelve years, again set foot on English soil. 
His ship was due at Plymouth early in the morning, and, as at 
about ten o'clock on the previous night he had been engaged 
in watching the Ushant light blinking fiercely upon the horizon 
until at last it went out like a dying lamp, he expected to land 
there by nine o'clock at the latest. But although the night 
seemed clear enough as he smoked his pipe before turning in 
and counted the lamps, green and red, of the many vessels 
bearing down this ocean highway to make Ushant, and passing 
some of them, within a few hundred yards of the liner; after- 
wards in the mouth of the Channel the fog came down. 

Like most old travellers on the sea, at the change of speed 
of the engines he awoke instantly. Then the syren began its 
melancholy hooting, repeated at intervals of two minutes 
Rising, Rupert looked through his open port-hole to find that 
they had run into a bank of dense fog through which they 
must pass dead-slow for hours, screaming their apprehensions 
mto the white and woolly gloom, whence from time to 
time they were answered by other vessels as frightened as 
themselves. 

Although the sun showed through it like a yellow Chinese 
lantern not till ten o'clock in the morning did that mist lift, 
with the result that it was four in the afternoon when they 
dropped anchor in Plymouth harbour. 

Two and a half more hours were taken up in transhipping 



46 Cbc TRUas of tbc Sptrtt 

baggage, silver bullion, and passengers to the tug, and in 
passiiij the Customs, so that the special train did not steam 
out of Plymouth Station until after sunset. Rupert, a person 
quite regardless of appearances, and one to whom money was 
valuable, took a second-class ticket, and, as a result, found that 
he had a carriage to himself. Here, in the south of England, 
the evening was mild, and letting down the window he looked 
out. A soft, fast-falling rain gave to the autumn ruin of the 
landscape a stamp of peculiar sadness. Melancholy cattle 
stood at the gates of sodden fields, leaves fell from the trees 
beneath puffs of wind, women under umbrellas hurried to 
their cottage homr -nd, unlighted as yet by lamps, unwarmed 
by the glow of fires, the grey stone farmsteads appeared deserted. 
To one accustomed for years to the sun of the East, and to its 
solemn, starry nights, the scene seemed desolate indeed, and 
its gloom sank deep into Rupert's heart. 

He wished that he had not come to Er , ! ad. He wondered 
what awaited him there, and whether his mother were alive or 
dead. It might well chance that the latter was the case, for 
since the letter which he received at Abu-Simbel, he had no 
tidings of her, and although he had telegraphed his arrival 
from the steamer, of course there was no time for him to 
receive an answer. He had hoped, indeed, for news at 
Plymouth, and had stood twenty minutes waiting his tiirn 
at the purser's window, only to be told that there were no 
letters or telegrams for him. 

At first Rupert was alarmed, then remembered that as he 
had neglected to wire the name of his ship from Port Said, he 
could scarcely expect to hear from his mother on board of 
her. Therefore, the absence of them meant nothing. And 
yet he was frightened, he knew not of what, much more 
frightened than ever he had been at the beginning of a battle, 
or when entering on any other risky enterprise. Danger, real 
danger, seemed to be nearer to him. 

At Exeter Rupert bought sotne evening papers, the first he 



Ube l^eturn ot IRupert 



47 



had seen for years, and in reading them forgot his indefinite 
anxieties. So the time went by somehow till at length, 
stietched out endlessly around him, he saw the lights of the 
squalid suburbs of London whereof they do but seem to 
accentuate the dreary sameness ; a whole firmament of fallen 
stars relieved here and there by the tawdry constellation of a 
gin-house. 

Paddington at last ! Into the great, empty station runs the 
double-engined train. Still although it is half-past eleven at 
night a number of people are standing upon one of the 
platforms, that at which it halts. These are friends and 
relations who have come to greet sundry of the passengers on 
their return to England. There, for instance, is a young wife, 
who, catching sight of her husband's f.ice, runs along by the 
carriage door heedless of the remonstrances of the porters with 
whom she collides violently, until it comes to a standstill. 
Then in an instant that long-divided pair are in each other's 
arms again, and Rupert turns his head away so as not to spy 
upon their happiness, muttering to himself: "Lucky fellow, 
who has someone to care for him," and descends on to the 
platform, looking for a porter to help him with his hand 
baggage. As i* -'ices he has to wait a while, since all the 
men available h«.. ^one to the aid of the first-class passengers, 
leaving the few " seconds " to look after themselves. 

While Rupert stood thus patiently he became aware of a 
tall lady wearing a long cloak who was searching the faces of 
the crowd. Disappointed she began to walk past him towards 
another group by a saloon carriage further down the train, and 
their eyes met. 

"Surely," he said, starting and lifting his hat, "you must 
be my cousin Edith grown up." 

"Oh, Rupert, there you are!" she exclaimed, in a low, 
pleasant voice and holding out her slender hand. " Yes, of 
course it is I, grown up, and old too." 

" One moment," he interrupted, for her dark cloak and hat 



48 Vbe Mwe of tbe Sptrit 

suggested to him that she might have come to break bad tidings. 
•• Tell me how— what is the news of my mother ? " 

"She is much better and sends her love, but of course 
could not come to meet you." 

The anxiety left Rupert's face. 

«• Thank Gcd I " he said, with a sigh of reliei". " Ah 1 here's 
a porter, now let us see about the luggage." 

•• I could not find you anywhere, although you are so big," 
said Edith, as having secured a four-wheeled cab they followed 
the man to one of the vans. "Where did you hide yourself, 
Rupert? I thought that you were not in the train at all." 

"Nowhere. I stood for nearly five minutes by those 
second-class carriages." 

" Oh ! I never looked there ; I did not think—" and she 

checked herself. 

" Hi ! that's one of mine," exclaimed Rupert, pointing to a 
battered tin case with Lieutenant R. Ullershaw, R.A., painted 

on it. 

"I remember that box." said Edith. "I can see it now 
standing in the hall of your house with the name in beautiful, 
fresh, white letters. I came to say good-bye to you, but you 

were out." 

"You are ve.y observant!" he said, looking at her with 
curiosity. " Well, it has seen some wear since then— like its 

owner." 

" Yes," she said demurely ; " only the difference is that the 
wear has much improved you" and she glanced at the tall, 
soldier-like form before her with admiration in her eyes. 

"Don't pay me compliments," Rupert replied, colouring. 
" I am not accustomed to them ; and if you do, I shall be 
obliged to return them with interest." 

" You can't," Edith answered merrily. " There is nothing of 
me to be seen in this cloak." 

" Except your face, which is beautiful enough," he blurted 
out, whereat it was her turn to colour. 



i 

if' 



i 



Zbt IRettirn ot Vupert 



49 



"There," he went on awkwardly, as at length the cab 
started, piled up with luggage. " It was awfully kind of you 
to come to meet me, all alone too, and so late. I never 
expected it, and I am most grateful." 

" Why, Rupert, how can you suppose that I should do 
anything else? Unless I had broken my leg or something, 
1 should have been there if it had been three in the morning. 
It's the greatest pleasure I have had for a long while, and, 
Rupert, I — I mean we — are all so proud of you." 

"Oh, please don't, Edith," he broke in. "I have done 
nothing more than my duty, not very well always, and have 
been rewarded much above my merits, while many better men 
were overlooked — perhaps because I am supposed to have 
prospects. Say no more about it or we shall quarrel." 

"Then I won't. I don't want to quarrel, I want to be 
friends with you, for I haven't many. But you mustn't be 
angry if I can't help feeling proud all the same that one 
among the lot of us has at last done something worth the 
doing, instead of wasting his time and strength and money 
in every sort of horrid dissipation, like horse-racing and 
gambling." ~ 

Rupert muttered something about such occupations always 
leading to trouble. 

" Yes, indeed," she answered ; " and you mustn't think me 
a prig for speaking like that, for I am not good myself a bit. 
I wish I were. But we had such a lesson lately, with that 
wretched Dick with whom I was brought up like a sister, 
you know, and scandals in the paper, and all that sort of 
thing, that I can't help feeling rather bitter, and glad that 
there is one of us whose name appears in the papers in 
another way." 

As she spoke the light of a passing carriage-lamp fell full 
upon her earnest face and wide blue eyes, and Rupert 
understood how pure and beautiful they were. 

Certainly had she so designed it, Edith could have found 



I 



U 



50 



Ube Was of tbe Spirit 



no better way and opportunity of making an excellent first impres- 
sion upon the somewhat simple mind of her cousin Rupert. 

At length the growler lumbered up to the well-remembered 
door of the little house in Regent's Park that he had left so 
many years ago. 

"Go in, Rupert, go at once," said Edith. "Your dear 
mother is wild to see you. I'll pay the cab." 

He hesitated a little, then muttering that it was very good 
of her, gave way, and ran rather than walked up the steps and 
through the door which the servant had opened at the sound 
of wheels, up the stairs also, to the drawing-room on the first 
floor. And here at last, seated in an invalid-chair, her stiff 
arms outstretched to clasp him, and words of joy and blessing 
upon her pale lips, he found the beloved mother whom he had 
not seen for so many years. 

"Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, for mine 
eyes have seen—" she murmured presently, and broke off, for 
her tears choked her. 

Rupert rose from his knees by her side, and turning his 
head away, said in a gruff voice that he must go to see about 
the luggage. So down he went to find Edith and the two 
servants struggling madly with his things which the grumpy 
cabman had refused to bring in. 

"Leave go, Edith," he said angrily. "How can you? Why 
did you not call me ? " 

"Because I wouldn't interrupt you," she gasped, "but oh, 
Rupert, do you pack your boxes full of lead, or are all your 
savings in them ? " 

"No," he answered; " only a couple of stone steles and a 
large bronze Osiris-an Egyptian god, I mean. Go away, you 
girls, I will see about them to-morrow; my night things are 
m the bag." 

They went readily enough, who desired no further acquaint 
ance with the Colonel's boxes, one down to the kitchen, the 
other upstairs with the bag, leaving Rupert and Edith alone. 



XTDc iRctum or iRupcrt 



ml^'^^f '^« »*!<^-;';i"'-8ine a man who travels about 

"I'll g,ve you another pair," he ejaculated, still covered 
with confusion, as they passed together into the diningZm 
where his supper was waiting. ^ 

" Dear me," said Edith, « this unwonted exercise has n„^« 
^e very hot," and she threw off first her long do k tdThen 
her hat, and stood before him in the lamplight ' '" 

Oh. she was beautiful, beautiful ! or so thought this dweller 
m deserts, whose heart and mind were soft af wlx wfth ' 

Eniiii^^r ^"^ ^'' '- -" '^' ^c..:rsXnZ 

Th?"^°^! *k' ^'°'^'' °^ ^"^^^'^ y°"^h had been fulfilled 
The perfect shape, so light and graceful, and yet so ta^l tl: 
waving hair of rich gold that gleamed vL o ' * 

white brow, the larg'e, deep WuTeyes 1 6^?^ '" 
redeemed from pridf by th'e rouLeTiheeks "a^d ch^^^^^^^^^ 
ghding, measured movements- all th^.. 7 ^'^"^> ^^e 

in such a sense since boyhood, andThat is more h T' ''°'"'" 
eyes told her the story. '"°''' ^'' »«"sP"ent 

she^said. '""""'' ''^^^^°°' '°°^'"^ ^' ^^^ other; then 
So he went A, ,h. door closed behind h,™ Edi.h sank 



s» 



TCbc Mas of tbc Spirit 



into a chair Uke a person who is suddenly relieved from some 
mental strain, and her face became very thoughtful. 

"That is over," she said to herself, "and far better than I 
expected He does not care for anybody, I am sure, and— 
the question is-do I like him ? I don't think so, although 
he IS handsome in his way, and a man. There is still a 
wall between us as in childhood— we are different. No, I 
don't think that I care for him," and she shivered a little. 
"Also there is that wretched Dick to be considered now as 
always. Oh, Dick. Dick ! if I don't take this chance it is the 
third I shaU have thrown away for you. You worthless Dick, 
who are yet the only man who does not make me shiver. But 
I am not sure. He is good; he is distinguished; he will 
almost certainly be Tx)rd Devene, and beggars can't be 
choosers. Well, there is plenty of time to think, and mean- 
while I will try to make him thoroughly in love with me before 
he meets other women." 

Then the door opened, and the maid came in with the 
soup. 

Such was the home-coming of Rupert Ullershaw. 



CHAPTER IV 



A BUSINESS CONVERSATION 

Edith, who was not an early riser, oreakfasted in her own 
room. At half-past nine on the moining following Rupert's 
arrival the maid as usual brought up her tray, a newspaper— the 
Morning Post—zn^ three letters. Two of these were of a sort 
with which she was very familiar, unpaid millinery bills, but the 
third was addressed in Lord Devene's unmistakable hand- 
wntmg, that was of as hard and uncompromising an appearance 
as his own face. Throwing aside the bills with a shrug of 
her rounded shoulders, she opened her noble relative's epistle. 
It was brief and to the point : 

" Dear Edith,— Come round after breakfast if you can. I 
shall be in till 10.45, and wish to speak to you.— Yours, 

" Devene." 

" Bother I » she said, as she laid it down. " I shall have to 
scurry through my dressing and take a cab. Well, he must 
pay for it. I wonder what he wants." 

Lord Devene now lived at Grosvenor Square. Even in the 
mmds of the most progressive latter-day agnostics primeval 
supersftions are apt to linger. Perhaps it was some senMment 
of the sort which causes an African savage to burn the hut 
where a death has occurred and build himself a new one, that 
induced Lord Devene to sell the Portland Place house after 
the tragic decease of his first wife, at far below its value, and 

53 



54 



Ubc WUes or tbe Spirit 



buy himself another, though it is fair to add that the reason he 
gave for the transaction was the state of the domestic drains. 
However this may have been, Lady Devene Number Two 
never slept in the haunted chamber of Lady Devene Number 
One. 

At 10.46 precisely Edith paid off her cab at the spacious 
steps of the Grosvenor Square mansion. 

I' Is Lord Devene in?" she asked of the butler, the same 
quiet, dark individual who had filled the office years ago in 
Portland Place. 

" Yes, Miss Bonnythorne," he answered respectfully ; " but I 
was just brushing his hat," and he glanced doubtfully at the 
clock. 

"Show me in, Tai.ot; he wishes to see me," she said, and 
Talbot bowed in acqiiesceftce. 

Although no orders had been given to that effect, it was 
understood in this establishment that what Miss Bonnythorne 
desired was to be done. 

A few seconds later she was ushered into the long library 
behind the dining-room, at the end of which Lord Devene was 
engaged in stamping a letter on a beautiful buhl writing-table 
near the window. 

"Ah I my dear Edith," he said, in his hard, clear voice, as 
she glided slowly towards him, " you are only just in time. 
Another half-minute and I should have been gone." 

" Ha a minute is as good as a century," she answered. 
" Lots of things can happen in half a minute, Cousin George. 
One might die in it, for .nstance." 

" Yes," he replied, " or be bom, which is worse, or commit 
a murder, or engage oneself to be married, or as you justly 
ren-ark, do lots of things. Life is made up of half-minutes, 
isn't it— most of them very bad ones," and he looked at her 
and smiled that peculiar smile of his which never seemed 
to get away from the r^ion of his mouth. Pleasant-natured 
people generally smile with their eyes, others of a different 



H Xnsfness Coni^rsatfon 



55 



character from their lips alone, like a dog, which is apt to 
give a sarcastic air to that variable and modified expression 
of inward satisfaction. 

Lord Devene had changed a good deal since last we met 
him. Then he was sandy-coloured, now he had become grey ; 
indeed his peaked beard was quite white. The wrinkles upon 
his face also had deepened very much, and even in that not 
over-lighted room black crow's-feet were visible beneath his 
quick, restless eyes. Advancing age had laid its hand upon 
him although he was barely sixty-three. Also, he had lost 
something of his old de.iant air ; his iron will and resolution 
seemed to have weakened beneath the attacks of circumstance. 
He hesitated sometimes and looked at the other side of an 
argument ; he was less sure of his deduced facts, less resolute 
in their application to his private affairs. 

"You look tired," said Edith, as he came forward and 
kissed her cool, pink cheek. 

"Tired!" he exclaimed, with something like a groan and 
sinking into a chair. " Would you not be tired if you had 
scar:ely closed your eyes for three nights? Edith, I can't 
sleep, and I don't know what is to be the end of it, I don't 
indeed." 

She threw an anxious glance at him, for these two, notwith- 
standing the difference of their age and sex, were bound 
together by strong ties of sympathy, and she was really grieved 
that he should be ill. 

" I am so sorry," she said, in a gentle voice. " Insomnia is 
a terrible nuisance, but don't trouble yourself too much about 
it, the fit will pass off." 

"Yes," he answered grimly, "it will pass off, because I shall 
take drugs this evening. I always do the fourth night, though 
I hate them." 

"Those stuffs sometimes lead to accidents. Cousin 
George," replied Edith, pretending to be absorbed in tracing 
the flowers of the carpet with the point of her umbrella, but 



56 



Ubc Mai? ot tbe Spirit 



weary face from beneath her lOng 



really watching his 
eyelashes. 

" Yes, they sometimes lead to accidents," he repeated after 
her, "as I have good reason to know. But after all, accidents 
are not always undesirable. I daresay that life still seems a 
very pleasant thing to you, Edith, yet others may think 
diflFerently." 

"You ought not to, Cousin George, with your position and 
wealth." 

" I am old enough to know, Edith, that position and wealth, 
which you rate so highly, do not necessarily spell happiness, or 
even content. After all, what am I ? A rich peer at whose 
name old women and clergymen turn up their eyes, they don't 
quite know why, and whom men are afraid of because I can 
say sharp things— just one of the very common crowd of rich 
peers, no more. Then for my private life. Nothing interests 
me now ; like the Roman Emperor I can't find a new excite- 
ment, even horse-racing and high stakes bore me. And at 
home, you know what it is. Well, I am not the first man 
who has bought a cow and found that she can butt— and 
bellow." 

Edith smiled, for the vigour of the allusion tickled her. 

"You know my one hope," he went on, almost with passion, 
"or if you don't, you are old enough and have brains enough 
to understand. I wanted sons sprung from a quiet, solid 
stock, sons who could make some good use of all this trash 
of titles and of riches which it is too late for me to do myself; 
men who would bear an honourable name and do honourable 
deeds, not fritter away their youth in pleasures as I did, or in 
what I took for pleasures, their manhood in the pursuit of 
idle philosophies that lead nowhere, and the accumulation of 
useless cash, and their -old age in regrets and apprehensions. 
I wanted sons, it was ray one ambition, but—" and be waved 
his hand through the empty air—" where are my sons ? " 

Now Edith knew Lord Devene to be a hard man where his 



a jBu8ine00 Conversation 



57 



interests were concerned, wicked even, as the word is generally 
understood, as for instance, Mrs. UUershaw would understand 
it. Thus he would gibe at morality and all established ideas, 
and of every form of religion make an open ir.ock. Yet at 
this moment there was something so pathetic, so tragic even, 
about his aspect and attitude, that her heart, none of the 
softest, ached for him. It was evident to her that his cold, 
calculated system of life had utterly broken down, that he was 
exceedingly unhappy— in fact, a complete failure ; that although, 
as he had so often demonstrated, there exists nothing in the 
world beyond the outward and visible, of which our brain and 
bodies are a part, yet strong as he was that nothing had been 
too much for him. He was conquered by a shadow, and in 
its effects at least that shadow seemed very like the real and 
solid thing which some folk call Fate, and others the Hand of 
God. The idea disturbed Edith, it was unpleasant, as sickness 
and the thought of death are unpleasant. Therefore, after the 
fashion of her nature, she fled from it, and to turn the subject 
put the first question that came into her mind : 
" How is Tabitha to-day ? " 

Instantly all pathos, with the touch of dignity that was bred 
Oi it, left him and he began to sneer. 

"Thank you; that noble and exalted haus-frau appears to 
be very well. Having paid her morning visit to the kitchen 
and scolded the cook for extravagance until, I regret to say, 
she gave notice, she is now seated in her dressing-gown reading 
a holy Gennan work upon predestination, from which she has 
been so good as to translate to me some passages that 
appeared to her to bear directly upon my spiritual future. 
But I didn't send for you to talk about my wife and her 
grotesque views. Rupert UUershaw is back, is he not ? " 
She nodded. 

" Tell me about him. What is he like ? " 
"Tall, strong, handsome in a kind of way, except for his 
untidy hair and the lines upon bis brow, which made him look 



58 



Zbc Mas of tbe Spirit 



■ 



IJ 



as though he had been trying to solve an acrostic for ten years, 
old looking for his age, awkward in his manner and slow of 
speech." 

" A good portrait," he said approvingly, " of the outside. 
Now for the in." 

Edith rubbed her forehead, as was her manner when 
deliberating. 

" That's hard," she answered ; " for how can one describe 
what one doesn't understand ? But I'll try just to get him 
into my migd as I see him. I think— well, I think that he is 
very much the sort o' man you said just now you would like 
your sons to be, if you had any." 

Lord Devene started as though something had pricked him. 

•• I beg pardon," Edith added hurriedly. " I mean that he 
is thoroughly industrious, conscientious, religious, and all the 
other good * ouses.' Would you believe it ? After he had gone 
to bed last night, he came downstairs in an old ulster and undid 
a great box with a rope round it in order to get a Bible out. 
I heard the noise, and thinking one of the servants must be 
ill, or something, went to see what was the matter. There at 
a. 30 a.m. I met him on the stairs in that costume, and a queer 
couple we must have looked. I asked him what on earth he 
was doing with the luggage. Thereon he calmly explained 
that by mistake he put his Bible into the trunk he had in 
his cabin, and that as he did not like to disturb me to borrow 
one at that time of night he had to go to find it, and he 
showed me a large, frayed book which had been rebound, by 
himself he remarked, with a deer's skin. He added gravely 
that it was his custom always to read a portion of the Scriptures 
— that's what he said — before going to bed, that he hadn't 
missed doing so for years and wasn't going to now. I 
answered that was what I called true religion, and we parted. I 
didn't tell him how glad I was that he hadn't knocked me up 
and asked for a Bible, for upon my word, I don't know where 
I should have found one." 



a Su0fne80 Converaatfon 



99 



I 






Lord Devene laughed heartily, for Edith's deacription of 
the scene tickled his sense of humour. 

"Why," he said, "he ought to have married Tabitha," 
" there would have been a pair of them. I expect they will 
get on capitally together, as—" and he checked himself, then 
added: "What an uncommonly queer fish he must be, 
though he wasn't always such a model youth. Well, 
whether because, of the Bible or in spite of it, Master 
Rupert has done very well. He is a man with a career 
before him; there is no doubt of that— a career, and in 
all probability," and he sighed, "other things, for no one 
can do without sleep for ever." 

She nodded her head again, but said nothing, seeing that 
there was more to come. 

" Is this military saint married by any chance ? " he asked. 

" Oh, no ! certainly not." 

"Or engaged?" 

"Not in the least, I imagine. I should say that he has 
scarcely spoken to a woman for years. He seems so— so— " 

"Is innocent the word you were looking for? Well, so 
much the better. Look here, Edith, you've got to marry him." 

She made a droll little face and answered : 

"This is very sudden— isn't that the right thing to say? 
But might I ask why?" 

" For two reasons. Because it is to your interest, and, a 
better one still, because I wish it." 

" Let me see," said Edith. " What are you and I to each 
other ? Second cousins once removed, I think ? " 

"Yes; second cousins once removed, and more — friends," 
he answered, with slow emphasis. 

** Well, has a second cousin once removed and a friend the 
right to tell a woman whom she must marry?" 

"Certainly, under the circumstances. This fellow will 
probably be my heir; I must face that fact, for Tabitha 
will scarcely get over those habits of hers now— at any rate, 



6o ubt tnuiy of tbe Sofrit 

the doctors don't think so. So I wish him to marry someone 
for whom I have affection, especially as I expect that not* 
vnthstanding his religious tomfooleries, etc., he is the sort 
of man who makes a good husband." 

"And supposing the doctors are wrong about Tabitha?" 
asked Edith calmly, for these two did not shrink from plain 
speaking. 

" If so, you must still be provided for, and, my dear Edith, 
allow me to remark that you are not quite a chicken, and, for 
some cause or other, have not provided for yourself so far." 

"I don't think I should live in any great luxury on 
Ruperts pay," she suggested, "even if he were willing to 
share it with me." 

" Perhaps not ; but on the day of your wedding with him 
I pay to the account of your trustees ;^ a 5,000, and there 
may be more, whatever happens — when I get to sleep at last" 

"That is very kind and generous of you, Cousin George," 
she answered, with sincerity, "and I'm sure I don't know 
why you should do it — for a second cousin once removed. 
But why on my wedding-day with Rupert particularly?" 

"I have told you, because I wish it, and why not with 
him? Do you dislike the man?" 

She shrugged her shoulders. " I have not fallen in love ; 
I am not given that way." 

He looked her straight in the eyes. 

"No," he answered, "because you have always been *in 
love,' as you call it, with that rascal Dick. Now, don't 
trouble to fence with me, for I know. Dick can be 
communicative at times — after dinner." 

Edith did not try to fence, only she said, with some 
bitterness and colouring a little: 

"Then that's the worst thing I have heard about him yet, 
which is saying a good deal." 

"Yes; never trust a man who brags of his conquests. 
Listen, Edith 1 I help Dick because he amuses me, and is 



m Su0ine00 ConverMtfon 



6i 



useful. That's why I am going to make him a member of 
Parliament. Now I can't prevent your marrying him, if you 
like, and are fool enough, which to me is inconceivable. But 
if you do, out goes Dick, and there will be no ;^3 5,000 paid 
to your trustees." 
" That's rather hard, isn't it, Cousin George ? " 
" No J it is merciful. Edith, I will not allow you to marry 
that worthless, unstable scamp of a fellow if I can help it, and 
for you" own sake, because I am fond of you." 
•• I never said I wanted to marry him." 
" No; but because of him you don't want to marry anybody 
else, which comes to much the same thing, so far as your future 
is concerned." 

She thought a little while, rubbing her forehead as before, 
then replied : 

" Well, all this is very clear and outspoken, but I suppose 
that you don't expect an answer at once. Remember that 
Rupert himself may have views. He is quite the sort of man 
who will not marry at all, on principle. Also, you only have 
my account to go on, you have not seen him yet since he was 
a boy. When you have, you may cease to think this proposed 
— arrangement — desirable." 

"Quite true," he answered. "You have a very logical 
mind. Bring him to dinner here to-night, and we will talk 
the matter over again in a few days' time." 
Edith ros*! to go, but he stopped her. 
" How is your banking account ? " he asked. 
" For all practical purposes I believe it has ceased to exist," 
she answered gravely, for the matter was one which really 
troubled her. 

He smiled, and taking his book from a drawer, filled in a 

cheque. 

"There," he said; "that may help to keep the wolf from 
the door for a little while, and I daresay you want some 
dresses." 




6j 



^f^c WUi» of tbe Spirit 



EJth looked .t the cheque; it w.. for ^^,50. 



I 



CHAPTER V 



THE DINNER-PARTY 



When Edith reached home it was to find that Rupert had 
been engaged all the morning in unpacking his baggage. Now 
he had just set up the two steles, which, it may be explained 
for the benefit of the uninitiated, are sepulchral tablets whereon 
the old Egyptians inscribed the records of their lives, or 
sometimes prayers. They were massive articles, as Edith had 
discovered on the previous night, most suitable to their 
original purpose in a tomb, but somewhat out of place in a 
very small London drawing-room, perched respectively on a 
piano and the top-shelf of a Chippendale bookcase. 

"Don't they look well, mother?" he was saying. 

"Yes, dear, yes," answered Mrs. Ullershaw doubtfully ; 
"but perhaps a little solid and time-worn." 

"Time-worn! I should think they are," be answered. 
" One of them is about four, and the other three thousand 
years old, but the more recent — no, not that of the man and 
his wife seated side by side — the other, is much the more 
valuable. It comes from Tel-el-Amarna, which, as of course 
you know, was the city built by the heretic king, Khuen-Aten, 
and was put up in the tomb of one of the royal princesses. 
Look at her picture on the top, with the globe of the sun 
above, and from it the rays ending in hands all stretched 
out in blessing over her. I'll translate it to you, if you 
like." 

At this moment there was a most ominous crack, whereon 
Edith, who had entered unobserved, remarked mildly : 

63 




TOe mus of tbe Sjjfrlt 



Th«« I. ' °"* **** bookcase is." 

•ccommodatS. * ^ """"^ ""'^ "<>' Po^Wy b« 

«^U"r;;tt„.^"- "" "■»"^'™« «» god. he 

"Do you think, Cousin Mary » askerf v^uu 
bim depart with this relic of IS p«t^*fhl i" '^' ""''^'^ 
persuaded to remove tho,. f v^u ' ^"P*'* <=°«W be 

on hf^ng *ThS''LT"°\"' ?*"• «' ">' «• W' '«« 
c«.W JrHi""" ^"?^-" "'""«' Edith decidedl, ", 

rr^^"^.tu::r' *"" " '""*-"' *"" found .h, 

bwrd, hrttn«S ™^* ""°"« "■' ?■•'« o« the .ide- 

-«h..,rhr.s:rrd.'rr^r""--" 



JLbc annner-parts 65 

WhUst they were at their meal a note arrived for Rupert 

had I'd it '' '^'^'"'^^"?" ^«'^«d Mrs. Ullershaw, when he 

and ^^tJ^T'" u" '"'"^"^'^ ^^°"^y- " H^ >^ants Edith 
and m, elf to dme this evening, and says that he has got the 
Under- Secretary for War, Lord Southwick. to meet me Of 
course I can't go and leave you alone the first S Tam ^t 
home. I'll write and say so." ^ 

h»l^'.™^ '^^ *^^ "°*^ ^'^*' ^^«^- Edith, you read it • I 
have not got my spectacles." cda u , i 

So she read : 

"Dear RuPERT.-Welcome home, and, my dea;- fellow 
a hundred congratulation,! You have doie s lendir I 
hm your ptatse, on all side,, and 1 am very proud of you 
But I want to tell you all this in person. Come and S 
.o-night with Edith at eight. I have'just met Southt ck le 
Undersecretary for War, at the club, and he is most nxio„s 

ne has put off somethmg or other in order to meet vou I 
took the liberty of saying that he was sure to do thr.s 
knew ttat you could not as yet have made an, eng^emS; "_ 
your affecfonate cousin, ,f^™;°«; 

"»'l'';V''f' ''°° "■"" S"- ^'^." Mid his mother. 
But I don t wish to," Rupert answered, with energy, "i 
hate dinner-parties." ' 

AhJi^k'TVu ^T ^°" ^^" '^^^^ '°' '^ ^hy not now? 
Also Edith would be disappointed." 

Lor/q'' t '°r''l'^'* '^"' y°""« '^^y- " I ''ant to meet 

aul . ''• . I^'^ ""^ ^' '' ^^^ «'^t^» bore in London 

quite a curiosity m his own line." ^"uon , 

Then Rupert gave way, and having sent a verbal acceptance 

E 



66 



We Mas of tbe Spirit 



tne bronze Osins on the sideboard. 

tJZ * T, ''''^. ^"P"* *''** dinner-party was indeed a 
^ r ?i *l'' ^""' '^'^ ^*«=^'y «°ft«"«d his vivid recoUec- 

day by day with the most heart-felt remorse. With a shudder- 
nnw /, '^\T\^ remembered its last dreadful chapter, and 
fn w?Ti ^' '^''^ *" *^°"«^ *^^ ^^^'^ °f »°°^« new tragedy. 

dfd hf '" *^/**«^//°«>P«ny of Lord Devene. Most heartily 
e^enof r.K r^'^'o'^ '" '^' '"""^''y °^ °'d Bakhita, or 

other H ^ ! \ °^ *^' ^''"^ ^^"^ •" *^« S«"d*". or i^any 
other desolate place, so long as it was far from Mayfair He 

even regretted having come home; but how could he refuse 
to do so at his mother's prayer? Well, it must be faced- 
escape was impossible, so h^ set his teeth and prepared to go 
through with the thing. * 

"Great Heavens, what a man !" reflected Edith to herself 
glancing at his stern countenance, as he helped her from 
the cab that evening. "One might think he'was going to 
execution, not to dinner." e 6 ^ 

The door.-how grateful ^Rupert felt that it was a different 
door-opened, and there iiis gratitude faded, for behind the 
footman stood that identical spare, sombre-looking man who 
had told him of CUra's death. He had not changed in^he 
shghtest. Rupert would have known him a hundred yard! 
off; and what was more, it seemed to him that the obsequious 
smUe with which the butler greeted him had a special Quality 
tha the sight of him suggested interesting memories to the 

WmL ^;V'*r*"-^'^' the very thought of it made 
mm fed cold down the back. 

Edith vanished to take off her cloak, and he, who must 
wait for her. was left alone with that black, smiling demon. 

Glad to see you back safe and sound. CoIoaeV he said. 
as he took his coat. ^ 



TTbc SHnner-partB 67 

ThJtl "^u"* "? ^''^ '*'"^'" 8'""*^*^ R"Pert involuntarily. 

him .. ru"'°"?' " ""'^' '°' '^^' '='yP»'<= »«°tence puzzled 
him ; then taking the point, as he imagined, went on : 

«..oKiK ?''^^ ^°'' ^^^' '^^ <^h»nges. sir -in this 

Sf b'S^'rK-' "''"• ^^""-*"d he glanced cautiously, 
fim behind him and then at the powdered footmen by the 
door- I am sure you won't betray me. sir. if I say that so do 

wis" «nH^ K .^'^'P' '•'• ""'^ ^*^^^ ^«' fi«' ladyship 
^Ln^t^H'^ r'^ ^"'^"''^^ ''^''' ^°^ ""ost °f the 
t^T !, 1 ^." '"^ ^°"^ °^ P°°^ C'"*' ''ho always tried 
"H^rteLn?, ^'^'".^^^-d^hip's anger, and was generous. 

r^d tracts, sir," he added, with peculiar bitterness, "whereas 
we loved her first ladyship "-here his voice sank ti a whis^ 
— almost as much as you did, sir." 

At this moment, to Rupert's intense relief, for really his 
head was swimmin.j beneath the horror of these confidoices, 

wa'lkf^^ . r' !!°°", ""''" ^^^''^ "^^'^ ^"^ through them 
rirL \ ^^V'^^ "»*° '^e^ing an eyeglass, who. he 
gathered, was Lord Southwick. The butler, whose someihat 
saturnine appearance in truth covered an excellent heart and 
^o really was delighted to see Rupert, if for no other reason, 
because his late mistress had been so fond of him. was 
obliged to step forward to take Lord Southwick's coat. At 
this moment, too, Edith arrived, 'ooking radiant in a dress of 
black and silver, saying : 

" Now. Rupert. I am ready." 

" So am I. I am sure." he answered. 

" T^"l ^°F-^ ^ reproachful, I have not been very long." 
and she fixed her gase upon his head. 

"Is anything wrong with my hair?" he asked, becoming 
aware of it. *^ 

"I don't know until you take your hat off," she replied 
gently, but wondering how long it might be since her 
distinguished cousin had gone out to dinner. 



68 



Ube Mai? ot tbe Spirit 



Rupert snatched off the hat and thrust it into the unwilling 
hands of one of the door foctmen, for it was not his business 
to receive hats. Then, piloted by other footmen who met 
them at intervals, at length Miss Bonnythome and Colonel 
UUershaw were announced, in stentorian tones, at the threshold 
of the great drawing-room. 

On the further side of the apartment two men were leaning 
against a marble mantel-piece, for the night was chilly, and a 
small fire burned on the hearth ; while at a little distance, 
engaged apparently in looking straight before her, a placid, 
handsome-looking woman of stout proportions, with great 
coils of hair wound about her head, sat upon an Empire 
sofa, her hands folded upon her plain black dress, which was 
unrelieved by any jewellery. 

For a moment Rupert's recognition of the men was merely 
automatic, since all his attention was taken up by the splendid 
mantel-piece that he remembered well, and on which he seemed 
to see the ghost of Clara leaning as she was wont to do. Yes ; 
it was the same that had stood in her boudoir, moved here as 
too valuable to be left in the old mansion. He could not 
mistake those siatues which supported the shelf above. A 
mist gathered before his eyes, and when it cleared he saw Lord 
Devene advancing on him with outstretched hand, nodding 
affectioiuitely to Edith as he came. 

The same man, he thought, only several degrees greyer in 
tone, and not quite so firm in his walk. Then, in the actual 
presence of his enemy — for so he felt him to be, now as always 
— the courage of the conscience-haunted Rupert returned to 
him, and he determined to play his part to the best of his 
ability. 

As he approached, Lord Devene was thinking to himself: 
" Edith summed him up very well, as usual — a bear, but a 
fine, right-minded bear who has learnt his lesson once and v 
for all. It is written on his face." Then he said in the most 
hearty fashion that Iw was able to command, though no 



Ube Bfnnet'patti? 



69 



affectation of cordiality could altogether deaden the brassy 
ring of that well-remembered voice : 

" Ah ! here you are, punctual as a soldier should be, and 
very welcome, I can tell you, my dear Rupert. I am delighted 
to see you back safe and sound, and bringing your sheaves 
with you in the shape of all sorts of honours," and taking 
Rupert's great, sunburnt palm in his dry hand, he shook it, 
adding : " Why, what a big fellow you have become in 
every sense of the word. Don't ask me to mount you this 
season." 

"Thank you," said Rupert simply, then fixing on the 
allusion to his personal appearance as easiest to deal with, 
went on . " Afraid one is apt to grow stout in Egypt. Can't 
get enough exercise, too much sun there. How are you ? " 

Then he stopped, for another voice, also well-remembered, 
was addressing him, and he turned to see his cousin Dick. 
Undoubtedly, even at that moment he noticed it, for by con- 
stitution and training Rupert was observant, Dick was a very 
handsome man. The dark and languid eyes looked a little 
tired, it was true, and the oval face had lost some of its colour. 
Still, it and the graceful, shapely form remained attractive to 
behold — at least, so thought many women. 

" How do you do, my hero of a hundred fights ? " said Dick, 
in the drawling, rather sarcastic voice which had always irritated 
his cousin as a boy, and still irritated him to-day. 

"Very well, thank you, Dick," answered Rupert; "but I'm 
not a hero, and I have not been in a hundred fights." 

"It's near enough," said Dick, shaking his hand in a 
somewhat weary fashion. " A man is what people choose to 
think of him, the exact facts don't matter. We have called 
you the family hero for ye-'.rs, and as our records reveal no 
other, of course we make the most of you." 

" Then please stop calling me so now, there's a good fellow, 
for I don't like it. I am only a very ordinary officer in the 
Egyptian army." 






7© 



Ube m«^ of tbe Spirit 



" The great were ever modest," answered the exasperating 
Dick. "Why—" and he fixed his eyes upon his cousin's 
rather seedy dress-coat, "I hoped that you would come with 
all your orders on. Well, well get you to a pubUc dinner 
where you will have to wear them." 

"Stop talking nonsense, Dick," said Edith sharply, for she 
saw that Rupert was beginning to grow angry, and feared lest 
his cousin's jealous chaff should produce some explosion. 
"Here are Lord Southwick and the other people at last. 
Come, Rupert ; I want to introduce you to Lady Devene." 

So Rupert was introduced to her ladyship, who, awaking 
from her private meditations, held out her plump hand, 
looked him in the face with her fine, china-blue eyes, and said, 
with a German accent : 

"Ah ! you are the ColoneJ Ullershaw of whom I hear so 
inuch, the soldier who has been fighting bravely for the 
English. I am very glad to see you. I like soldiers ; my 
father was a soldier, but the French kiUed him at Gravelotte. 
You are very welcome." 

Rupert bowed, and as he did so felt that this lady spoke the 
truth, and that her greeting was cordial and without reservation. 
From the beginning he conceived a regard for this German 
peeress, feeling her to be sound and honest, according to her 
lights. Then Lord Devene brought up Lord Southwick and 
introduced him, first to his wife and next to Rupert. After 
this the other guests claimed attention, and Rupert was able to 
retire and employ himself in examining the pictures until dinner 
was announced. 

To his delight he found that Edith was given to him as a 
partner. 

"I am glad," he said shyly, as they went together down 
the broad stair. " I never hoped for such luck." 
She looked at him innocently and asked : " What luck ? " 
"Why, having to take you down instead of one of those 
strangers." 



Vbe SMnttaypatti? 



71 



" I am sure it is very nice of you to say so, Rupert, and I 
appreciate it," she answered, smiling. 

••Yes," said the voice of Dick behind them; ••but, old 
fellow, you should pay your compliments in a whisper. Sound 
travels up these London staircases," and he and his partner, 
a pretty and piquante heiress, laughed merrily. 

•• Take no notice of that impertinent Dick," said Edith as 
they entered the dining-room ; •• it is only his way." 

•• I don't like his way j I never did," grumbled Rupert. 

Nor, to tell the truth, did Edith, who knew well that Dick 
was furiously jealous, and feared lest he should go too far 
and show it openly. 

At dinner Rupert found himself seated on the left of Lady 
Devene, who was at the head of the table, and opposite to Lord 
Southwick, who had of course taken her down. Next to 
Lord Southwick was the pretty heiress, and by her Dick, who 
therefore sat almost opposite to Edith. With the rest of the 
company we need not concern ourselves. 

The dinner went on as dinners in big houses do. After 
he had drunk some champagne, Dick began to flirt ostenta- 
tiously with the pretty heiress, who appeared to be quite 
equal to the occasion ; his object being, as Edith was aware, 
to make her jealous, or at least angry. Lady Devene, in her 
German accent, conversed with Lord Southwick about cooking 
— a subject in which he did not seem to take the slightest 
interest; while Edith drew on Rupert to tell her of the 
Soudan and the military operations there in which he had 
shared. This subject suited him well, and Lord Devene, 
watching the pair of them from the bottom of the table, 
soon understood that he was talking in a manner that 
compelled the respect of her intelligence, since she listened 
to him intently enough. 

Although Rupert did not know it. Lord Southwick began 
to listen also, and having exhausted the subject of entr^, so 
did Lady Devene. 



1: 



7a 



TCbe ms^ ot tbe Spirit 



"What was that you said about the advantages of the 
SuakimrBerber route, Colonel Ullershaw?" asked Lord 
Southwick, presently fixing his eyeglass upon him. 

Rupert repeated his remarks. 

" Hum," commented Lord Southwick. " Wolseley thouaht 
otherwise." ** 

"I did not mean to set up my opinion against that of 
Lord Wolseley, my lord," answered Rupert; "it was only 
a private view I was expressing to Miss Bonnythome" 

"And a very sound view too, in my judgment," said the 
Under-Secretary, in the precise, official manner that rarely 
deserted him; "indeed, events have proved it to be so. 
Moreover, Colonel Ullershaw, your opinion is undoubtedly 
entitled to respect. I know it; for after hearing that I was 
to meet you at dinner, I looked up your record at the War 
Office and read a private memorandum, which you may 
remember writing for the information of your superior 
officers, though perhaps you were not aware that it was 
forwarded home." 
Rupert coloured and muttered that he was not. 
"I wish that it had been acted on," continued Lord 
Southwick; "but it wasn't, and there's an end. By the 
way— it is rather unkind to speak of it— but did you know, 
Colonel Ullershaw, that you were once recommended for 
the V.C— after Tamai where you were wounded?" 
Rendered absolutely speechless, Rupert shook his head. 
"Well, you were; and what's more," he went on, with a 
twinkle in his eye, "yoa would have got it if your name 
hadn't happened to begin with a U. You see, the persons 
recommended of about equal merit or interest were put down 
alphabetically; and as there were only a certain number of 
crosses to be given, a fellow whose name began with T got one 
and you didn't. It wasn't my system, I may add, but as the 
man who was responsible for it is d'^ad, and many things have 
happened since then, I don't mind telling the story." 



trbc SHnner-parts 73 

"I am very glad," blurted out Rupert; "I never did 
anything to deserve the V.C." 

Now this noble Under-Secretary who had been an official 
all his life— for he succeeded to his peerage in an accidental 
fashion— who looked like a ramrod, and who was reputed 
to be such a bore, was yet a man with a kind heart, an 
appreciation of worth and a sense of justice. Perhaps it 
was these qualities, or some of them, which caused him to 
answer : 

"Well, you know best, and if so, it shows that the 
alphabetical system works belter than might have been 
expected. But now give me your opinion, and you too, 
Lady Devene, on this case. An officer posted a picket 
outside a square. The square was attacked, picket cut off. 
Result of the attack indecisive, enemy being in possession 
of the bush about the square. Officer who posted the 
picket rather badly hurt by a spear through the shoulder—" 
"I beg you," broke in Rupert; but Lord Southwick went 
on imperturbably : ^ 

"A wounded man crept into the square at night saying 
that he had survived the massacre of the picket and got 
through the enemy, but that the sergeant who was stabbed 
through the leg lay in a clump of bush about six hundred 
yards away, and had not yet been discovered by the Arabs, 
who occupied a donga in great force between the camp and 
the said clump of bush. It being impracticable to send a 
rescue party, the wounied officer dresses himself up in the 
jibba and turban of a dead Arab, and thus disguised, gets 
tl ugh the donga, finds the wounded man, and a storm 
<x ig on, contrives somehow or other to lead, or rather 
to . ..rry him back to camp, doing the last hundred yards 
under a heavy fire both from the Arabs and oui own 
senrnes. Now did that officer deserve the Victoria Cross ?" 
"AcA/ mein Gott, I should think so," said the phlegmatic 
Lady Devene, with a force quite foreign to her nature as it 



74 



Ube m$;^ of tbe Si>ttit 



was commonly understood by her surroundings. " What was 
the name of that brave man ? I should like to know it." 

"I forget," answered Lord Southwick, with a stony grin. 
" Ask Colonel Ullershaw. He may remember the incident" 

'* Who was it, Rupert ? " said Edith, and the whole long 
table listened for the reply. 

Then was the Recording Angel forced to add another 
to the list of Ruperf 8 crimes, for he lied, and boldly. 

" I don't know, I am sure Never heard of the business ; 
but if it happened at all, I should say that the story has been 
greatly exaggerated." 

A smile and a titter went round the table, and the Under- 
Seaetary grinned again and changed the subject. 

For fully three minutes Lady Devene was lost in deep 
meditation. Then suddenly, while her husband was telling 
some story of grouse-shooting on a Scotch moor, from which 
they had just returned, she broke in in a loud voice, thumping 
her heavy hand upon the table : 

"ffimnull I see it now. It is Lord Southwick's little 
joke. You are that man. Colonel Ullershaw." 

Whereat the company broke into a roar of laughter, and 
Rupot nearly died of shame. 



The feast was over at last, and Lord Devene came into the 
hall to bid his guests good-bye. 

" Well," asked Edith, as he helped her with her cloak, " you 
have seen him. What do you say now ? " 

"Excelsior!" he said. "You must climb that difficult 
height. You must marry him; that is, if you can, which 
I very much doubt." 

" Do you indeed ?" answered Edith. " Almost am I minded 
to try — for the sake of argument Good-night ! " 

" Didn't I tell you he was a hero ? " sneered Dick, as he led 
her to the cab. " Poor Edith ! I pity you, exposed to the 
{jBsdnations of such a warrior." 



i 



Vb€ Vtnnet«|>atty 75 

" Do you indeed," the repeated. " Well, I admit they are 
rather dangerous." 

Meanwhile Lord Southwick had button-holed Rupert by the 
front door. 

" I shall expect to see you, Ullershaw, at the War Office, 
where I wish to introduce you to the Secretary of State," he 
was saying. "Would to-morrow at half- past twelve suit 
you ? " 

Rupert, understanding that he had received an order, 
answered : 
••Certainly, my lord, I will be there." 



, 



CHAPTER VI 



RUPERT rXLLS IN LOVR 



The next morning Rupert attended at the War OflSce, and 
actually was introduced by Lord Southwick to the Secretary of 
State. His conversation with the great man was not long — 
three minutes must have covered it. Still, even a person of 
Rupert's rather unusual modesty could scarcely fail to under- 
stand from its tone that he was looked on with favour in high 
places. The Right Honourable gentleman went so far indeed 
as to congratulate him upon his past services, of which he had 
evidently been informed, and to hint that his future might be 
brilliant He asked him for how long he was on leave, and 
when he was told six months, smiled and remarked that it was 
a long time for so active a soldier to remain idle, adding : 

" Now, if we wanted to send you anywhere before it expires, 
would you be willing to go? " 

*' Certainly, sir," replied Rupert, with enthusiasm, for already 
he seemed to have had almost enough of London, and for the 
moment forgot about his mother, forgot also that return to 
duty would mean separation from Edith, whose society he had 
begun to find so agreeable. 

" Very well, Colonel UUershaw," answered the Secretary of 
State. " Remember about it, Southwick, will you ? All sorts 
of things keep cropping up out there in Egypt and the Soudan, 
and Colonel UUershaw might be the man to deal with some 
of them," and he held out his hand to show that the interview 
was over. 

" You have made an excellent impression, I am sure," said 

76 



. > 



Unpen f aiu m %o^ 



77 



Lord Southwick to him in the outer room. '*Only let me 
give you a tip. Our chief is rather arbitrary in hit ways, and 
expects to find tl.e promptness upon which he prides himself 
reflected in others. If he should wish to employ you, as is 
quite likely, don't hesitate or ask for time to consider, but fall 
in with his views at once. It will be better for you afterwards, 
as if you don't, you probably will not be asked again." 

Rupert thanked him for the hint and departed, reflecting 
that he was scarcely likely to hear more of the matter, especially 
as there were plenty of officers in Egypt capable of arrying 
out any mission or special service for which occasion niighl 
arise. He forgot that he was already considered sar^pssiui ; 
that he was, moreover, and probably would remain tiio heir to 
a very wealthy peerage ; in short, a person such as those m 
authority like to employ, since unto him that hath shall br; 
given. 

Soon Rupert discovered that this attitude towards himself 
was very general; indeed, in a small way, he became something 
of a lion. In addition to his other advantages. Lord 
Southwick's Victoria Cross story, of which he was known to 
be the hero, had got about, with various embellishments, and 
excited curiosity, especially among women. When town 
filled again, he was asked to public dinners, where, as Dick 
had prophesied, he was obliged to wear his orders. The first 
two or three he rather enjoyed, but at length there came one 
when, to his horror, in the unexpected absence of some 
distinguished general, suddenly he found himself obliged to 
return thanks for the army. In fact, he got through it pretty 
well, as was testified by the cheers of a not too critical 
audience, but convinced that his failure had been complete, 
he went home in great trouble. 

" What is the matter?" asked bis moiiier, noting his gloomy 
face as he stalked into the little drawing-room which he 
seemed to fill with his uniform and decorations; and Edith 
added : " Why are you home so early ? " 



^ li 



II 



7« 



TTbe mas of tbe Spirit 



"I came away before the end," he said solemnly; "they 
forced me to speak, and I made a fool of myself." 

Knowing Rupert, they did not take this statement too 
seriously, though Edith was somewhat relieved when, from the 
reports in the newspapers next morning, and from private 
inquiry, she satisfied herself that he had really done rather 
well. 

However this might be, Rupert would go no more to pubUc 
dmners, dreading lest again he should hear that awful and 
inaccurate eulogium of himself, and be once more requested to 
get up and give his views upon nothing in particular. However, 
plenty of private entertainments remained, and to these Edith 
saw that he did go, although it is true she did not particularly 
enjoy exposing him to the fascinations of various unengaged 
young ladies. But her cousin Devene's strict injunction 
notwithstanding, Edith had as yet by no means made up her 
mind to marry Rupert herself. She was thinking the matter 
over, very closely, that is all, and meanwhile had fuUy 
determined that he should marry no one else. So she was 
jealous of him, not for aflFection's sake, but for fear lest she 
should be forestalled. 

Of affection, indeed, she had none for Rupert; if anything 
she shrank from him personally-this big, rugged man— and 
his inner self she could not understand at all. He would 
converse with her on Egyptology and the art of war, and other 
subjects that bored her to death, not excluding religion at 
times. He would be earnest and take solemn views of things, 
conscientious abo to an extent that was absolutely painful,' 
even going so far as to reprove her for trifling society fibs! 
They had nothing in common— their two natures were as 
dissimUar as is the babbling stream from the bUck and iron 
rock over which it runs. Edith lived in the day for the day, 
to catch the sunlight, to flee from the shadow. Rupert re^ 
membered always that the day would soon be done, and 
that then must be rendered the account thereof; that the 



IRupert falls in %o\>c 79 

watchword of life should be Duty and Self-effacement for 
the common good, the greatest gain of man. 

At present, it is true, Edith had the art to hide these 
abysmal differences from his somewhat innocent eyes, 
although he did now and again wonder if she were not a 
little shallow. She listened to his discourses on the Pharaohs ; 
She suffered him to draw her plans of battles which she was 
apt to look at upside down; she even took an apparent 
mterest in his rather alarming views of human responsibilities, 
and bis belief m redemption that must be earned by sacrifice. 
But oh ! It was pain and grief to Edith, and though sh^ was 
far too clever to show it in his presence, or even in that of his 
mother, when he had gone she would rise and dance about 
the room m joy at her deliverance; yes, and allow Dick to 
seek her out and even endure his tiresome jealousy for the 
mere pleasure of that congenial fellowship. But she never 
allowed him any more, being too wise to compromise herself 
m such a fashion. 

"Oh I" Edith reflected to herself again and again, "if 
these things were done in the green tree, what would be 
done in the dry? If Rupert was so insufferable even as 
an admirer, what would he be like when he had assumed 
what she felt sure he would call the "duties and responsi- 
bilities of matrimony," in which she would be expected to 
take a daily and an ample part? 

Meanwhile, her business was to make him fond of her— to 
persuade him that she was absolutely charming and necessary 
to his existence. Nor did Edith fail at the Usk. Gradually 
Rupert grew to adore her, till at length, like a sudden light, there 
arose m his mmd an appreciation of the stupendous fact that, 
all unworthy as he was of such perfections, he might dare to 
cherish the ambition of making her his wife. 

After all, Rupert was very human, and one who had 
long acknowledged the fact that though it may be salutary for 
his soul's health, it is not good for man to live alone. With 



di^SS^.' 



8o 



TTbe mws of tbe Spirit 



that one unfortunate exception in his early youth, he had fled 
from women, rwt because he did not like them, who was no 
misogynist, but because be deemed it right. But now, when 
he came to think of it, why should he not marry like other 
men, and be happy in his wife's love, and leave children — he 
who loved children — behind him, like other men ? It was a 
great idea, and with Edith at his side, it grew upon him fast, 
unaware, as he remained, that the suggestion was one which 
emanated from the said Edith — not in words, but in a thousand 
acts and glances. He began to pay solemn court to her ; he 
was dreadfully respectful and considerate ; he blushed if any 
word with a double meaning were uttered in her presence, and 
when other men looked at her with admiration — and many 
did — he felt furious. 

He gave her gifts also. The first of them was a huge blue 
scarabaeus, set in gold, which, he informed her, he had himself 
removed from the breast of a body, where it had rested for 
three thousand years. Edith loathed that scarabseus, both 
for its associations and because it did not match any of her 
dresses ; also because it assured her that the day of decision 
was drawing nigh. Yet she was obliged to wear it sometimes, 
until she managed to let it fall upon the pavement, where it 
was broken to bits, which bits she showed to Rupert, as it 
appeared to him, almost with tears. He consoled her, though 
his heart was wrung, for the thing was really good, and next 
week in triumph produced another and a larger one ! 

Such were the humours of the situation ; its tragedies, very 
real ones, were to come ! 

It hpppened thus : Lord Devene, both for change of air and 
because he bated Christmas and everything to do with it, 
departed, as was his custom at that time of year, to spend a 
month at Naples. Thereon Lady Devene, as was Aer custom, 
migrated to Devene, the family place in Sussex. Now 
although the estates here were not so very large, for most 
of the Devene real property consislsd of an acre or two of 



Vnpert falls in Xove 



Si 



( 



houses in Shoreditch, a colliery, and the ancestral brewery, 
the house was magnificent and extensive. To be there alone 
oppressed even Lady Devene's phlegmatic temperament, so 
she asked various people who were more or less congenial to 
share her solitude. More especially did she insist that Rupert 
and his mother should come, for she liked them both, 
particularly Rupert. This involved the asking of Edith, 
whom she did not like, while Dick Learmer would be present 
as a matter of course in his capacity of secretary and 
factotum. 

Rupert did not want to accept, although the shooting was 
excellent and he was fond of shooting. Even when Edith said 
that she should go anyhow— for in secret she longed for the 
relief of a little of Dick's society, in love as he was— he still 
hesitated. Then she remarked that it would be scarcely kind 
of him to deprive his mother of her only outing, since, if he 
stayed in London, she would stay also. So in the end Rupert 
yielded, for circumstances were too much for him. Yet he 
hated being obliged to accept this hospitallcy. Lord Devene 
might be absent, it was true, but the saturnine if friendly 
butler, and many painful memories, remained. Once before, 
when he was nineteen, Rupert had spent a Christmas at 
Devene ! 

It was New Year's Eve. That day, which was fine and 
frosty, was devoted to the shooting of the home coverts, where, 
as they lay extremely well upon the ridges of hiiis with little 
valleys between and rot a pheasant had as yet been so much 
as fired at in them, the sport was very fine. Some of the 
ladies who were staying in the house, and amongst them 
Edith, came out after luncheon Ut nee the shotAng >A the 
last beat, which was the gr««t stand of fhc day, for it took 
over an hour to do, and if i\m gum wer« good, generally 
between three and four hundred pheasants were killed 
there. Here the woods ran down to a poio*, beyond which 
lay a valley. The guns were posted dote together on the 



*• JSbt mxs ot tbt fBpMt 

further side of this valley in a gorge that led to a covert 
called the Wilderness, since, had they stood at the bottom, 
the pheasants would have passtd over practically out of shot. 
As it was, they all sped on down the gorge, heading for the 
Wilderness a quarter of a mile away, and still travelling at a 
great height Indeed, it was a good shoi who brought down 
one in three of these pheasants at this time of year when they 
flew so boldly. 

Rupert's place was at the centre of the gorge where the 
birds came highest, and a little above him, about five-and- 
twenty yards to his right, stood Dick Learmer, who, of course, 
arranged the shoot, and who was what in sporting parlance is 
called an " artist " at drivoi birds, though not so good when 
they had to be walked up, as he was easily tired and put off 
his form. He had placed ^Rupert in this very difficult spot, 
which was in full view of all the line of guns and one generally 
reserved for some great performs, because he was sure that, 
being totally unaccustomed to that kind of sport, he would 
make an exhibition of himself, especially as he had only one 
gun which must soon get very hot. 

As it chanced, however, the young man who carried Rupert's 
cartridges, knowing this, lent him a thick dogskin glove for his 
left hand and ventured to give him a little good advice, namely, 
to stick to cocks, which were more easily seen, and of these only 
to fire at such birds as were conning straight over him. Rupert 
tanked him and chatted with Edith, who was his companion, 
until the sport began, remarking that it was very kind of Dick 
to have given him such a good place, which should have been 
occupied by a better man. 

Presently the pheasants began to fly, and in that still air, 
cold with coming frost, went straight as arrows for their 
refuge in the Wilderness. The first cock came over at an 
enormous height. 

" Fire ten yards ahead of it, sir," said the wise young man 
"and chuck back." 



Itnpert f alia in Xove 



83 

Rupert obeyed, and as his cartridges chanced to be loaded 
with No. 4 shot, brought down the bird, which fell stone^lead 
far behind him. 

" Bravo ! " said the gun on his left, « that was a good shot/' 
and indeed its unexpected success put Rupert into excellent 
spirits and made him think that the thing was not so difficult 
after all 

Therefore, in the issue he did not find it difficult for 
always remembering the instructions of his mentor to fire 
ten yards ahead, and never lifting his gun save at those cocks 
that came straight over him, letting all hens and wide birds go 
by h,s success, with the help of ihe No. 4. was remarkable. 
Indeed, he brought down nearly as many birds with his one 
gun as most of the other sportsmen did with two, greatly to 

n^"^ ?!.°^ ^^'^' ^^'^ ^'^^ '^^ ^««*""i"g had fathomed 
Dick's kind intentions. 

But Dick was not delighted, for this petty success of his 
nval irritated him. Therefore, as the long drive went on. 
meanly enough he set himself to disconcert him in a ven^ 
unsportsmanlike manner. Noticing that Rupert was firing at 
those cocks that passed right over his head, neglecting his own 
birds whereof there were a plenty, Dick devoted himself to 
Rupert s, kilhng a number of them with long cross shots before 
Rupert could get oflf his gun. 

Rupert said nothing, for there was nothing to say, though 
he could not help feeling a little annoyed, till at last he did 
speak-to Edith, asking why Dick did not confine himself to 
his own pheasants. 

"Oh !" she answered, shrugging her shoulders, "because 
he s jealous even about his wretched shooting." 

Then an accident happened, for one of the cocks, shot far 
forward by Dick in this unlawful fashion, in falling, struck 
Edith on the shoulder and knocked her straight backwards to 
the ground, where she lay quite stiU for a few moments, then 
sat ip crying with the pain and gasping : 



84 



TTbe Mws of tbe Spirit 



in 



"Oh, it has hurt me so 1 " 

Now Rupert's wrath broke out, and he shouted to Dick, who 
pretended not to have seen what had happened : 

" Stop shooting and come here." 

So Dick came. 

" Look at the end of your infernal, unsportsmanlike tricks," 
said Rupert, his eyes blazing with anger. " You might have 
killed her." 

" I am dreadfully sorry," answered Dick (and he was) j " but 
really I don't see how I am responsible for the accident. It 
must have been your bird that struck her." 

" It was not my bird, and you know it. Loader, who shot 
that pheasant ? " 

" Mr. Learmer, sir. It was coming over you very high, but 
Mr. Learmer fired before you* could, and killed it." 

Just then Edith staggered to her feet, looking very white. 

*' Go back to your stand, Dick," she said. " Rupert will help 
me home. Give me your arm, Rupert." 

So very gently, half-supporting her as he had done many a 
wounded man, Rupert led her to the house, which was not far 
away, in his grief and confusion speaking tender words to her 
as they went, even to the lenj;; .!i of calling her " dear " and 
"dearest." Edith did not a:'.sm : liim, who had a good excuse 
for keeping silent, although in reality she was much more 
frightened than hurt. But on the other hand, neither did she 
attempt to escape from the arm that was placed about her 
waist to bear her weight. 

When she had reached her room, taken off her things and 
rubbed some liniment on the bruise — for she refused to allow 
the doctor to be sent for — Edith sat down in a chair before the 
fire and began to think. The crisis was at hand, that bird 
from the skies had precipitated it. After those words of 
Rupert's, things could not stay where they were. He must 
propose to her. But the question was — ^should she accept 
him ? She had been debating the point with herself that very 



Ittipeit falls in Xove 



8s 



morning, and practically had answered it in the negative. 
Notwithstanding Lord Devene's injunctions and the money 
which depended upon her obedience, so consumedly had Rupert 
bored her of late, so greatly did she dislike the idea of him as 
a lover and a husband, so infinite was the distance between 
them although his passion blinded him to the fact, that she 
had made up her mind to take the risks and have done with 
it all, to tell him that she had always looked upon him •* as a 
friend and cousin," no more. Of course, under the circum- 
stances, thiswould have been the kindest course towards Rupert, 
but that was a matter with which Edith never troubled her 
head. She looked at the question from the point of view of her 
own comfort and advantage and no other. 

Well, this was her conclusion of the morning. The problem 
was— did it still hold good at the fall of night ? She thought 
not. After all, Edith had the instincts of a lady, and this 
incident of the shooting, especially that of his pretending that 
it was not he who had shot the bird, revealed to her very 
clearly that in addition to his worthlessness and vices, Dick 
lacked those of a gentlenxan. Thi^ he was a coward also, 
who feigned ignorance of her hurt because he feared Rupert's 
anger, although she knew well that he must have been longing 
to run to her, whose one redeeming virtue in her eyes was that 
he worshipped the ground she walked on. Now Rupert was a 
gentleman to his finger-tips, strong, tender, and true, and with 
him she would be safe all her life. More, her anxieties would 
be at an end; probably she would become a peeress, the 
mistress of great rank and fortune, both of which she desired 
intensely ; at the worst, she would be provided for, and the 
wife of a distinguished man who loved her, and who therefore 
would put up with much. 

Yet Edith hesitated, for all these good things must be bought 
at the price of Rupert's constant company for years and years 
until one of them deceased. She was very unhappy and— 
her shoulder hurt. She wished that something would come^ 



ft 



86 



TCbe vnav of tbe Spirit 



to decide her doubts, to take the responsibility out of her 
hands. Under the circumstances, many girls might have 
Wlen back upon petiticna for light and guidance to the 
Power that they believed to direct their destinies; but this 
was not Edith's way. Lord Devene's teaching had sunk 
deep into her heart, and she lacked faith in anything save 
the great blind, terrible, tumultuous world, whereon, bom 
•I she thought, of the will of the flesh alone, she flittered 
from darkness into darkness. 

The maid brought up her tea, and on the tray was a letter 
which had come by the second post It proved to be from 
Lord Devene, and began by giving her a sarcastic and amusi% 
account of the humours of a Naples hotel. Its ending showed, 
however, that this was not the object of the epistle. It ran : 

" I hear that you are all kt Devene, includii^ the Family 
Hero, who, I hope, has had his hair cut and bought himself a 
new hat. The party must be amusing. Write and tell me how 
many of them come down to morning prayers. Write and tell 
me your news also, my dear Edith, which I await with anxiety. 
It is time that matter was settled, for if it is left too long, R. 
may be sent spinning to the other end of the world, and be no 
more heard of for years. I will not recapitulate my arguments. 
I, who have your true interests at heart, wish it for good 
reasons, and that is enough. Trust yourself to me in this 
matter, Edith ; I uke the responsibility, who know more and 
see further than you do. Do not let any foolish whims, any 
girlish weakness, stand between you and your future. I have 
said j I beg of you to listen and obey.— Your aflectionate, 

" Devene." 

Edith laid down the letter with a sigh of relief. The 
dedsicHi had been made for her and she was glad. She would 
vumry Kvtpett. It was certab now that if they both lived she 
would marry Rupert as her cousin George commanded her to 



ttnpctt falls in Xovc 



87 



do—for it was a command, no less. Yes ; she was glad, as, 
notwithstanding her hurts, she dressed herself for conquest, 
determining to do the thing at once, and have that engagement 
scene a bad memory behind her. 

But if there is any vision, any knowledge among those who 
dwell beyond, certain guardian angels upon this fateful night 
must have made up their hooks sad-eyed and sore hearted. 




CHAPTER VII 



BNOAGBD 



Not wishing to meet Dick until his temper was more composed 
after that day's adventure, Rupert did not go into the smoking 
or billiard-rooms before dinner, but retired to the library, 
purposing to spend there those dreary three hours which, in a 
country house, must be got through somehow between the 
advance of the mid-winter twilight and the welcome sound of 
the dressing-bell. His intention was to read a commentary on 
the Koran, if the somewhat agitated state of his mind would 
allow him lo do so, for he loved to acquire miscellaneous 
learning, especially if it bore upon the East, its antiquities, 
religions, or affairs, a fact that Edith had good reason to 
lament As it happened, this laudable project for the utilisa- 
tion of spare time was frustrated by Lady Devene, who, 
finding out his whereabouts from the gloomy butler returning 
with an empty tea-cup, came to inquire of him the cause of 
Edith's accident. He told her the facts in his usual unvar- 
nished style, minimising Dick's share in it as much as 
possible. But in spite of her phlegmatic exterior. Lady Devene 
was a quick judge of truth and character. 

" Ach ! " she said, " it is Dick's tricks again, and I do not 
like Dick ; he is a bad lot, vain of his face, throwing himself 
head down upon any pleasure that comes, not working for 
himself; but what is the English word? Ah! I have it — a 
cadger, a bit of bad money that looks all right outside, no 

God-fearing man, in that way like his lordship " (she always 

88 



'*^. 



1 



En0a<}«6 



H 



I' 
1 



called her husband " his lordship "), " but without his brains ; 
one wicked by weakness, not by will." 

Rupert looked at her, not knowing exactly what to say. 

" Ach I " she went on, "you stare at me ; you who are his cousin 
think that I, who am his wife, am hard upon his lordship, but, 
meim Gott I who can be hard upon iron? It is the iron is 
hardest, and hurts what hits it. I say he is a terrible man." 

" Then," asked Rupert solemnly, "why did you marry him ? " 

She looked up and down the great, lonely room lined with 
books, into which none save the housemaids ever penetrated, 
and then at the closed door behind her, and answered : 

" I will tell you, Rupert, who are honest, who think as I do 
and believe in a God and judgment. I am well bom in my 
own country, very well born, of an older and more distinguished 
family than any of you, who made your money out of brewing 
but the other day. But after my father's death in the war we 
were poor, my mother and I, so when that rich old Lady Hodgson, 
who was German bom, you know, and a friend of our family, 
asked me to come to live with Ler for eight months of every 
year, and paid me well for it, why, I came. There I met his 
lordship, who found out that I sent most of my salary home 
to my mother, and that I thought otherwise than the fashion- 
able English ladies about many things — children, for instance, 
and after the death of her first ladyship began to take much 
notice of me. At last one day he proposed, and I said, 
' No,' for I always doubted that man. Then, oh ! he was 
clever. What do you think he did ? You see, he knew that I 
am brought up religious, so he tells me that he is greatly 
troubled by doubts, and that the real reason why he wants to 
marry me is that he thinks that I would be able to give him peace 
of soul again, and to bring him back into the fold of faith — yes, 
those were his words, • the fold of faith.' Him ! that black 
lamb ! " she added, with a gasp of indignation, while Rupert 
burst out laughing. 

"Ah!" she went on, "for you it is funny, but not for me. 



MICROCOPY RESOIUTKM TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 




la 12.8 


y. 


^1 


1^ 


■uuu 



^ >»PPLIED IIVMGE Ir 

^Sr^ 16S3 East Main Streel 

^^S Rochester. New York 14609 USA 

•^SS ("6) «2- 0300 -Phone 

^S (716) 288 - 5989 - Fax 



90 



^1^ TOlas Of tbc Spirtt 



i: I 



IM 



the mamage, and I liked tt^ h« ««ki» • "'umer wisn 

as mv o«^ T T u "^ '" ^°"'" ^"""tO' «s well 

faith. tI!'/ rrf"^ ^'"^ ^"^ ^"'^ °"t. The fold of 

KnocKS at, It IS the door of hell. I finH ho u^v 

C»«. he Md .t was a lieUe joke-" and rising from he S 
m he^woe and mdignadon. T.bUha held up her hand. I^d 
turned her fair face to heaven, wi.h . loolf o„ i, Uk ' ^ 

Rn^ dee™; '"" "'"'' '='"'' '"^ ™= '"" ■™^'^ 
"And what has been the end about his children?" .h. 

for^aterTm J Ttred ' """"' ""^ ™''«' ■"»" 

have it ci^stet^!!:;:: i-LTrr„v: LS o?.h': 

floor after him and beg him let it be madeTSr a 

llr^f "' 1°" "■' '""^ -Pe^'Won ,. and he "; fce 
^ not have « because the child WU cat^ cold. A^jl 

httte soul of h,s .t must live on unredeemed for e,er C 

!;:!":Sk2'm^::°^ ""- ''"«"' ■--- ^ >^^^^ 

"Don't say that," said Runert- '«if'» o u j 



^nguQc^ 



\r 



9» 

cW.d„f„i„eti5"verr "3, rV".'-. ''"'«"• "° 
lands and drink-shoos IV „ ^ "" """ "' «" *«« 

drove her .„ de'th ' „. TJ "* ""• ""' P«" Clara, or 

children he :m'do\he"taLtre "'j",,',""' "" ■""' 
And now I have told you a^d tL ,! ' ' "" """be- 
friend but God sin,^ r ,."^ •"' ■>«««. "ho have no 

listening soraHen,^ ' T " ^'^- '^ ' ""'"k y"" for 

comes .„ women who^' Talv , " Z'"*; ""* """"' 
of place and riches • '• .nV! ' ^ " """''' '"d *« 'o-e 
•he otter^ two „; ^'''"' T? ""°™« "P ■>« "■»». 
infinite reHerlTL:, '^^ 1^71^1^ ' *" '» '^"^"■' 

wiv«Tw D^e^; ^! '° "«T «■' ~"M"ces of the 
*» second It' oAh^r vrhifh"^ L*f "°h' "^-^ 

c^Ss1-,S tn^nf s£^" If "--^ 
articles of her narrow c^b, J"™? ' """'' "■» "uel 

or rather .he man^to^e si of he Ir' "" ■*'«'• 
"pon the bodies o^ her chlZ, a„S e^'haT '™''' 
pursue and torment their innoceit'trV ^ Z^"" 
tragedy was as ereat as that ,,f i, u '^^y' ^^^'^ 



92 



TLbc Mas Of tbc Spirit 



away from Tabitha's house as soon as possible. But first he 
must find an opportunity of speaking to Edith and learn his fate. 
Indeed, after the words which had broken from his lips that 
day, it was his duty so to do. If only it could be accom- 
plished this night, as it chanced he had a good excuse for 
departing on the following morning, since he had received a 
telegram from an old brother - officer, with whom he was 
engaged to stay in Norfolk, shifting the date of the visit 
and begging him, if possible, to come down on the morrow 
instead of that day week. 



As Rupert reflected thus, staring at the fire before which he 
stood, he heard the door open and close behind him, and 
turned round in alarm, thinking that Lady Devene had come 
back again. But it was not Lady Devene, it was Edith already 
dressed for dinner in a clinging robe of some soft white 
material, high because of the bruise on her shoulder; a bunch 
of forced lilies of the valley at her breast, her rich golden hair 
rippling upon either side of her small head and twisted into a 
great knot behind, and for ornaments a close-fitting necklace 
of fine pearls, Lord Devene's latest gift to her, and Rupert's 
great blue scarabaeus, a single and imposing touch of colour in 
the whiteness of her dress. 

"Oh," she said, "I came to look for Tabitha. What an 
awful name that is, it always sticks in my throat "—(this was a 
fib, because she had passed Lady Devene on the stairs, but it 
served her purpose)— " not to disturb your studies, my learned 
cousin. Don't look so alarmed, I will go away again." 

•• Oh, please don't," he answered. " Sit down here, do, and 
warm yourself. I was just— hoping to see you, and— behold I 
you glide into the room like, like — an angel into a 
dream." 

^^ " In answer to the prayers of a saint, I suppose," she replied. 
" Really, Rupert, you are growing quite poetical. Who taught 



BttdadeD ^3 

you such pretty metaphors? It must have been a woman, I 
am sure," 

" Yes," he answered boldly, « that is, if it is pretty-a woman 
called Edith." 

She coloured a little, not expecting anything so direct, but 
sat down in the chair staring at the fire with her beautiful dark 
blue eyes, and said, as though to turn the conversation : 

"You asked about my shoulder, or if you didn't, you ought 
to have done. Well, there is a bruise on it as big as a saucer 
all here," and with her first finger she drew a ring upon her 

UlCsSa 

"Confound him ! " muttered Rupert. 

"Him! Who? Dick or the cock-pheasant? Well, it 
doesn't matter. I agree, confound both of them." 

Then there came a pause, and Rupert wrung his hands as 
though he were washing them or suffering pain, so that Edith 
could not help observing how large and red they looked in the 
firelight. She wished that he were wearing gloves, or would 
keep them in his pockets. It would make matters easier 
for her. 

"I'm awfully glad you have come," he said awkwardly, 
feehng that if he didn't say something soon she would shortly 
go, " because I want to speak to you." 

"What about? Nothing disagreeable, I hope. Has 
Tabitha been making confidences to you? If so, please do 
not pass t^ -> on to me, for they obliterate the romance and 
discredit tl., .^oly state of matrimony." 

"Confound Tabitha," said Rupert again, "and her 
confidences!" for he was quite bewildered, and uttered 
automatically the first words that came into his mind. 

"Again I agree, but soon we shall involve all our relatives 
in one universal condemnation, so let us drop that topic." 

Then wearying of this fence, desiring to get the thing over, 
to have done with It, to see the doubtful bond signed, sealed' 
and delivered, suddenly Edith sat up in her chair and looked 



94 



^bc miai? of tbc Spirit 



i! 



at him. The blue eyes opened wide, and there came in^n 
them a hght which he had never ^en before a SDlen2 
d^zhng light as though some veil of darinl had bee^^^ 

him M Tk T^u '"^ * ''^ «'°^y ' '' '^^^^^ « last she suffe ed 
him to behold her soul. The face changed also, uponTthe 
njask of coldness broke as ice breaks sudden y beneath the 
blaze of the sun and the brea' ' .f the western wind di!c osine 
or seemmg to disclose, a river f pure love that ran benS' 
For one moment he resisted her as sometimes a mo"h apptrs 
to resist the splendour of flame, not because he deTred to fil^ 

rr '"/r '"* "*'^' ^° '^' '^^ wonder ndhe^S^^^^^^^ 
of this sudden change engrave themselves for ever on S 
heart Then as the white lids sank extinguishing Those fire ' 
till the shadow of the long lashes lay upon her cheekT .!^t ' 
in a low and hurried voice .- ' ^® ^^^^ 

hand "Zfl ""''°''l^'" ^* ''''^- " ^ *« »ot fit to touch your 
oh F^-.H tV'""^' ^'^^ '*• ' ^°^« y°"' and I dare to Jk-1 
She a't 'r ':-:^'' ■^'''' ^°" ^'" «'- y°" «fe to me." 
distent Itir' Ik "f "^ "° "^''"^^ ^^ -^^Pt^nce or 
stkt' But h. M '^ f' "^^'^' *° ^^^ '"-^ -« »he 
st^taess fiL ' ' '^"" ^^^"t-frightenad. perhaps, by her 
thi. ri J^ ^ ""* °'^^'" ''^'•^^ '" ^hich to recast the truth 
were iJt^'t nr""- T '^' '" ^'^ ^«-" the wh te^ 
tTl w .^' ^*'" '^' ^^" ^^^' looked at him. but this 
tt4l Th.' Twf "''' '°^ *^^^ "^^« troublS Jm^ 
Les a' Ed th rn f' r^'"' '^^^ ^*^ ^^'-^<^ ^«^d their 

Sd hlr hafd Z H M ^' '"' "^^' *" '■"'^"'^^ ^^^^l^-ation 
riusea ner nana and held it out towarrf« him a* i .l . 

understood, and taking that delU";" press Jdl^^^^^^ 
herTh-'''"'f?"^'^""«' P^-^ ^- -ms a'bou tr.^,^^^^ 
. M T' 'fJ^ ^'^'"^ ^^^ °° ^^'^ ^'°^ and lips. 

My shoulder," she murmured faintly; "it hurts." and full 
of contrition he let her sink back into her chair ^ ' '"" 

Do you love me? Say that you love me Edith" he 
whispered, bending over her. ' ^ 



''D^ZVen""'>^Tl ''' *"'"'-«<»' gl-"cing at her hand. 
«nH n """^ '^^ ""'^^^^ ^"'^ *° R"P«" this speech, 

and aU that U conveyed, seemed the most beautiful a^wa 
that^ ever passed the lips of pure and perfect maiden- 

lefrintrild' ^7' It '° V"" ''' ''''^'' ^"^^'^ ^^^^ "^ best 
kI r . u ^"°'^''' *^°"«^' ^^™« to him -a painful 
thought-for he moved uneasily, and turned red to the eyes 
or rather, to the puckered brow above them ' 

aftl?vrw!r?'"' P"^'"">^^ "it is only right, and 
after you have heard you must finally decide, for I wil not 
begm our engagement by keeping back anything frr you 

reflecting It : ''1' '' ^'^^"^^ '" remonstrance, then 

checklS^ rseV V T "'" '° '^"^^ ^ "^'^'^ ««""s, 
cnecked herself. Also she was curious. What conM fhil 

samt of a Rupert have done that was w^on^? '°"'' *''' 

a ere^t"S' "Tir'^!^"''' ''°^'^ ""^ P*^^""^' " ^ ^O'^^itted 
a great sm-a love affair-a married woman. She is dead • it 

js all over. and. thank God ! I have nothing more L con/ess 

Edith tried to appear grieved, but in reality, she was so 

TJ ^"f^^»^^-^o astonished, too. thaf any Za^ 

could have betrayed Rupert into an afalre .afanfU^.T^ 

L'Sur ''''''''' '-' ''-' -^^'^ '^-e seemed 
••I don't want to preach," she said. "I have been told 
tha men are very different from what they expect us to be 
St.ll, .t was good of you to tell me. and there is no more to 

?'at hfrn'' '''^~-: "' '^' ^^^^P^^ ''' ^-^« - "ooked 

latelv fr'l I \Tu' ^ ^° ^°P^ ^hat it was not- 
lately— for I thought- 1 thought—" 

v^TZ'lZ"'"'," '''^'■'•»«'»='; ""hy. it was when I 
was a Doy, years and years ago." 

" Oh 1 » she answered, " that makes it better, doesn't it ? " 



96 



TTbe mais ot tbc Spirit 



" It . akes it less dreadful, perhaps," he said, " for I lost 
my reason almost, and did not understand." 

"Well, who am I that I should judge you, Rupert? Let 
us never spenk of it again." 

"I am sure I don't want to," he replied, with fervour; 
'• but indeed you are good and kind, Edith. I never expected 
it; I was afraid that when you had heard you would turn 
your back upon me." 

" We are taught to forgive one another," she answereo, a 
little smile that would not be suppressed trembling about the 
corners of her mouth ; and again she held out her hand— this 
time the left— and suffered him to kiss it. 

In fact, he did more, for drawing off the only ring he ever 
wore, an ancient gold ring carved with a strange devic-— it 
was the throne-name of a Pharaoh, which Pharaoh himself had 
worn for three thousand years within the tomb— he put it on 
her third finger as a sign and a token for ever. 

"Another of those unlucky mummy things," reflected 
Edith. «'I wish I could get clear of the Egyptians and 
everything to do with them. They seem to haunt me." 

But she said nothing, only lifting the ring she touched it 
with her lips, a sight that may have surprised the spirit of 
Pharaoh. 

" Rupert," she said, " don't say anything of this to-night, 
except to your mother, if you wish. You understand, Dick's 
temper is so very unpleasant, though," she added, with 
emphasis, "I hope you understand also that I have no 
confessions to make to you about him or anybody else. 
I can't help it if he has always— purs ed me." 

" He had better give up his pursuit now," grumbled Rupert, 
" or there will be trouble." 

" Quite so. Well, I have no doubt he will, when he c mes 
to know, only, to tell the truth, I would rather he didn't know 
while you are here. I don't want a scene." 

"Well, if you like, dearest," said Rupert, "although I hate 



it, I can go away to-morrow morning, and meet you in a few 

"VL^^Ir".'"^ ^' '""^^ ^'' ^f ^" '^^°^'"8 engagement. 
T'hat will su.t very well indeed," she said, with relief, 
although, as you say, it is horrid under our new circum- 
stances, especially as to catch that train at Liverpool Street 
you will have to leave by eight to-morrow. Well, you will be 
back on Saturday, so we must make the best of it. Good 
gracious, look at the clock, the dinner-bell will ring in two 
mmutes, and you are not dressed. Go at once, dear, or-it 
wUl be noticed. There, that is enough. Go, dariing. my lover 
who will be my husband, go." 
And Rupert went. 

" It was not so bad as it might have been," thought Edith to 
herself, as rubbing her face with her lace handkerchief the 
while, she watched the door close behind him, "and really he 
IS ven^ nice. Oh, why can't I care for him more? If I could 
we should be happy, whereas now, I don't know. Fancy 
his telling me that story ! What a curious man ! It must 
have been Clara. I have heard something of the sort Dick 
suggested as much, but I thought it was only one of his scandals. 
Thats why Cousin George hates him so-for he does hate 
him, although he insists upon my marrying him. Yes, I see 
It all now, and I can remember that she was a very beautiful 
and a very foolish woman. Poor innocent Rupert ! " 

Rupert came down to dinner ten minutes late, to find that 
everybody had gone in. Arriving under cover of the fish, he 
took the chair which was left for him by Lady Devene, who 
always liked him to sit upon her right hand. Edith, he noted 
with sorrow, was some way off, between two of the shooting 
guests, and three places removed from Dick, who occupied 
the end of the table. *^ 

"Ach! my dear Rupert," said Lady Devene, "you are 
terribly late, and I could wait no longer, it spoils the cook. 
Now you shall have no soup as a punishment. What ? Did 
you go to sleep over that big book of yours up in the library? " 



11 



98 



TLbc Map of tbc Spictt 



Vi 



He made some excuse, and the matter passed off, while ,he 
ate, or pretended to eat his fish in silence. Indeed to him, in 
his excited state of mind, this splendid and rather lengthy 
New Year's feast proved the strangest of entertainments. 
There was a curious air of unreality about it. Could he, 
Rupert, after the wonderful and glorious thing that had 
happened to him utterly changing the vista of his life, making 
It grand and noble as the columns of Karnac beneath the 
moon. ''• the same Rupert who had gone out shooting that 
mominji. Could the handsome, phlegmatic Gerii.an lady 
who sat by him discoursing on the cooking be the same 
passion-tom, doom-haunted woman, who told him how she 
had crawled upon her knees after her mocking husband for 
the prize of her infant's soul? Nay, was it she who sat the-e 
at all? Was it not another, whom he well remembered in that 
seat, the lovely Clara, with her splendid, unhappy eyes full of 
the presage of death and destruction ; those eyes that he felt 
still watched him, he knew not whence, reproaching him, 
warning him he knew not of what? Was the gay and 
beautiful lady yonder, who laughed and joked with her 
companions, the same Edith to whom he had vowed himself 
not an hour gone? Ytj, it must be so, for there upon her 
finger gleamed his golden ring, and wnat was more, Dick had 
seen it, for he was watching her hand with a frown upon his 
handsome face. 

Why, too, Rupert wondered, did another vision thrust itself 
upon him at this moment, that of the temple of Abu-Simbel 
bathed in the evening lights which tunned the waters of the 
Nile red as though with blood, and of the smiling and colossal 
statues of the fi[reat monarch of long ago, whose ring was 
set upon Edith's hand in token of their troth? Of the 
dark, white-haired figure of old Bakhita also, who had 
not crossed his mind for many a day, standing there 
among the rocks and calling to him that they would meet 
again, calling to Dick and Edith also, something 'Jiat he 



wm 



com. down .„'^,i;:!:;:^„tr"' ■" '^ "^ """■• ■»«' 

.m«. J. ^ade her g-ey'.'n'd ^'ewl" r^ Sa "mtlT* ' 

yes, dear, ^he replied, in her gentle voice " hut oii iv • 
^^1 fj^ \"' '"'"'' ""'«''■« ""^ happy, as Tdo 

.?r h^ri: ""'Thr^"'^' "■"' "-'^^ -- -» 

«i umcr limes, ihe moment is dil we h-Avo H«ar . 
b.vo^__.. I,es .he Win of God, a„c. „o,H„g .„:. ^t'^nt' ■ 

of w!!'^".T'''"° ""'"'"• '■"' '"'" '^l' of hers all seemed cart 
af.enhe dea* of CU«; „.e™bered,to,l frf,; ^Xt 
to him her stem creed of renunciation ? ^ ^ 



lOO 



TTbe TPaai? of tbe Sptrtt 



At least it was one in which that company did not believe. 
How merry they were, as though there were no such thmgs as 
sorrow, sickness, and death, or bitter disillusionment, that >s 
worse than death. Listen ! the music began, and see, they were 
dancing. Dick was raltzing with Edith, and notwithstanding her 
hurt shoulder, seewed to be holding her close enough. They 
danced beautifully, like one creature, their bodies moving like 
a single body. Why should he mind it when she was his, and 
his alone? Why should he feel sore because he whose life 
had been occupied in stern business had never found time to 

learn to dance ? . u u 

Hark I the sound of the bells from the neighbouring church 
floated sweetly, solemnly into the hall, dominaf.ig the music 
The year was dying, the new year was at hand. Edith ceased 
her waltzing and came towards Rupert, one tall, white figure 
on that wide expanse of polished floor, and so graceful were her 
slow movements that they put him in mind of a sea-gull floating 
through the air, or a swan gliding on the water. To him she 
came, smiling sweetly, then as the turret clock boomer ut the 
hour of midnight, whispered in his ear : . „ 

" I whom you have made so happy wish you a happy New 
Year— with me, Rupert," and turning, she curtseyed to him 

ever so little. 

In the chorus of general congratulations no one heard her 
low speech, though Mrs. Ullershaw noted the curtsey and the 
look upon Edith's face— Rupert's she could not see, for his 
back was to her— and wondered what they meant, not without 
anxiety. Cculd it be-well, if it was, why should the thing 
trouble her ? Yet troubled she wa , without a doubt, so much 
so that all this scene of gaiety became distasteful to her, and 
she watched for an opportunity to rise and slip away. 

Meanwhile Rupert was enraptured, enchanted with delight, 
so much so that he could find no answer to Edith's charming 
speech, except to mutter-" Thank you. Thank you." Words 
would not come, and to go down upon his knees before her, 



V J^ 



. 



v'^n0ll0e^ 



lOI 



which struck him as the only fitting acknowledgment of that 
graceful salutation, was clearly impossible. Shr smiled at his 
embarrassment, thinking to herself how differently the ready- 
witted Dick, whose side she had just left, would have dealt with 
such a situation, then went on quickly : 

" Your mother is preparing to leave us, and you will wish to 
go with her. So goodnight, dearest, for I am tired, and shan't 
stop here long. I shall count the days till we meet in London. 
Again, good-night, good-nigb and brushing her hand against 
his as she passed, she left him. 




CHAPTER VIII 



Edith's crushed lilies 



" Rupert," said his mother, " I want you to give me your arm 
to my room, I am going to bed." 

•• Certainly," he answced ; " but wait one minute, dear. I 
have to take that eight o'clock train to-morrow morning, so I 
will just say good-bye to Tabitha, as I shan't come back 
again." 

Mrs. UUershaw breathed more freely. If there were 
anything in the wind about Edith he would not be taking 
the eight o'clock train. 

" Go," she said ; " I'll wait." 

Lady Devene was by herself, since amongst that gay throng 
of young people no one took much note of her, seated in a big 
oak chair on a little dais at the end of the hall far away from 
the fire and hot water coils, for she found the heat oppressive. 
As he made his way towards he * even the preoccuped Rupert 
could not help noticing how imposing she looked in her 
simple black dress, which contrasted so markedly with her 
golden hair and white and massive face, set up there above 
them all, elbow on knee and chin on hand, her blue eyes 
gazing over their heads at nothingness. In reality, the miser- 
able woman was greeting the New Year in her own fashion, not 
with gaiety and laughter, but with repentance for her sins 
during that which was past, and prayers for support during 
that which was to come. 

" Ach, Rupert ! " she said, rousing herself and smiling 
pleasantly as she always did at him, "it is kind of you to 

103 



£^itb'0 Crn8be^ Xtlfes 



103 



leave those young people and their jokes to come to talk 
with the German frau, for that is what they call me among 
themselves, and indeed what I am." 

" I am afraid/' he said, " I have only come to say good-night, 
or rather good-bye, for I must go to town to-morrow morning 
before you will be down." 

She looked at him sharply. 

"So I have driven you away with my tale of troubles. 
Well, I thought that I should, and you are wise to leave this 
house where there is so much misery, dead and living, for no 
good thing can happen in it, no good thing can come out 
of it—" 

"Indeed," broke in Rupert, "that is not why I am going 
at all, it is because — " and he told her of the visit he must 
pay. 

" You do not speak iibs well like the rest of them, Rupert ; 
you have some other reason, I see it on your face, something 
to do with that dreadful Dick, I suppose, or his-^ach ! what is 
the English word — his flame, Edith. What? Has she been 
playing tricks with you too ? If so, beware of her ; I tell you, 
that woman is dangerous ; she will breed trouble in the world 
like his lordship." 

Rupert felt very angry, then he looked at that calm, fateful 
face which a few hours before he had seen so impassioned, and 
all his anger died, and was replaced by a fear which chilled him 
from head to heel. He felt that this brooding, lonely woman 
had insight, born perhaps of her own continual griefs ; that she 
saw deep into the heart of things. He who understood her, 
who sympathised with, even if he did not entirely adopt her 
stern religious views, who knew that prayer and suffering are 
the parents of true sight, felt sure that this sight was hers. At 
least he felt it for a moment, then the unpleasant conviction 
passed away, for how could its blackness endure in the light of 
the rosy optimism of new-risen and successful love ? 

"You are morbid," he said, "and although I am sure you 



104 



T£hc mais ot tbe Splptt 



do not wish to be so, that makes you unjust, makes you pass 
hard judgments." ' *^ 

" Doubtless it is true," she replied, with a sigh, "and I thank 
you for telhng me my faults. Yes, Rupert, I am morbid, 
unjust, a passer of hard judgments, who must endure hard 
judgment, ' and she bowed her stately, gold-crowned head as 
before the appointed stroke of wrath, then held out her hand 
and said simply.: "Good-bye, Rupert! I do not suppose that 
you will often come to see me more-ach ! why should you? 
StUl If you do, you will be welcome, for on you I pass no hard 
ludgments, and never shall, whatever they say of you " 
So he shook her hand and went away saddened. 
Givmg his mother his arm, for she was very infirm, Rupert 
ed her quietly out of a side do^r and down the long pass^es 
to her room, which was next to his own at the end of the 
house, for stairs being difficult to her. she slept on the ground 
floor, and he at hand to keep her company. 

"Mother " he said, when he had put her in her chair and 
stirred the fire to a blaze, « I have something to tell you " 

" VVh!/°°>1,"^ "^"^t^^' '°'" ^^' *^*''" ^'^ ^^"™^d, and said : 
What IS It, Rupert ? " 

"Don't look frightened, dear," he replied, "nothing bad. 
something very good, very happy. I am engaged to b^ 
married to Edith, and I have come to ask your blessing on me, 
or rather on both of us, for she is now a part of me." 

"Oh, Rupert, you have that always," she answered, sinking 
back in her chair ; " but I am astonished." 

" Why ? " he asked, in a vexed voice, for he had expected a 
flow of enthusiasm that would match his own, not this chilly air 
of wonderment. ' 

"Because-of course, nobody ever told me so-but I 
always understood that it was Dick Learmer whom Edith 
car.d for, that is why I never thought anything of her little 
empress/ ways with you." 

Again Rupert was staggered. Dick-always Dick, first 






I 

1 



«Wtb'0 Cmsbed Xflied 105 

from Lady Devene and now from his mother. What could be 
the meamng of it ? Then again optimism came to his aid, he 
who knew full surely that Dick was nothing to Edith 

"You are mistaken there for once, mother," he said, with a 
cheerfu laugh; "I knew from the first what she though! 
about Dick, for she spoke very seriously to me of him and Ws 
performances m a way she would never have done if there 
were anytnmg m this silly idea." 

"Women often do speak seriously of the bad behaviour of 

the man of whom they are fond, especially to one whom they 

hmk may mfluence him for good." replied his mother, with 

the wistful smile which she was wont to wear when thinking of 

her own deep affection for a man who had deserved it little 

'Perhaps." he said. "AH I have to say is that if ever 
here was anythmg-and I know there wasn't-it is as dead as 
last month's moon." 

Mrs. UUershaw thought to herself that this simile drawn 
from the changeful moon, that waxes anew as surely as it 
wanes, was scarcely fortunate. But she kept a watch upon 
her lips. *^ 

"I am very glad to hear it," she said, "and no doubt it 
was all a mistake, since, of course, if she had wished it. she 
might have married Dick long ago. before you came into her 
life at all. Well, dearest. I can only say that I wish you every 
happiness, and pray that she may be as good a wife to you a^ 
I know you will be husband to her. She is lovely," she went 
on, as though summing up Edith's best points, "one of the 
most graceful and finished women whom I have ever seen • 
•he IS very clever in her own way, too, though perhaps not in 
yours ; thoughtful and observant. Ambitious also, and will 
therefore make an excellent wife for a man with a career 
She is good-tempered and kind, as I know, for we have always 
got on well during the years we have lived together. Yes, you 
will be considered very fortunate, Rupert." 
"These are her advantages, what are her drawbacks?" he 






io6 



Ubt mnv of tbc Spirit 



from h.m. though I must say at once that in my eyes she has 
none. 

"Which is at it should be, Rupert. Well, I will tell you 

vJ?}!V *?^' ^°" "^^ ^"'""^ ^8^'"^* them if I am right. 
Edith hkes pleasure ard the good things of the world, as. ^ter 
all, IS only natural, and she is extravagant, which perhaps in 

I'^Tf "[""""Tt^r' '''" "°' '"'"^'•- ^8*^"' I hope you will 
never fall HI, for she ,s not a good nurse, not from unkindness. 
but because she has a constitutional horror of all ill-health or 
unsighthness I have seen her turn white at meeting a cripple 
.ven, and I don't think that she has ever quite liked sitting 
with me smce I had that stroke, especially while it disfigured 
my face and made the lower eyelid drop." 

"We all have failings whicl^ we can't help." he answered; 

natural antipathies that are born in us, and I am glad to saj! 

b^k H^. ' 'T "' r^' ^° ^ ^°"'* think much of that 
black list, mother. Anything to add to it ? " 
She hesitated, then said : 

c„I^"^^-?' '^ij' ^^"' ^' ^""^^ '^"^^^ ""e as curious that 
such a girl as Edith should be so attached to men like Dick 
Learmer and Lord Devene, for she is fond of them both." 

Relationship, I suppose; also the latter has been very 
kind to her, and doubtless she is grateful " 

of I'l"'' ZT ^'''^' i"^'^^' ^^ ""^ her guardian until she came 
of age, and has practically supported her for years. But it isn't 
gratitude, it is sympathy between her and him. They are as 
alike m character mentally. I mean, as-as they are in face." 
Rupert laughed, for to compare the blooming Edith with 
he f^ed, wrinkled Devene. or even her quick 'humour Zt 
turned r.en and things to mild ridicule, with his savage 
cynicism which tore them both to pieces and stamped upl 
their fragments, seemed absurd. 

"I can't see the slightest resemblance." he said. « You are 
cultivating imagination in your old age. mother." 



B5itb'0 CrtiBbc& XiWca 107 

" ^ ^^^y that you are perfectly right, Rupert, and that 
th^e hmgs are all my fancy; only, my dear boy, try to 
make her go to church from time to time, that can't do any 
woman harm. Now I have done with criticisms, and if I have 
made a few, you must forgive me ; it is only because I find it 
nard to thmk that any woman can be worthy of you, and of 
course the best of us are not perfect, except to a lover. On 
the whole, I think that I may congratulate you, and I do so 
from my heart. God bless you both ; you. my son, and Edith, 
my daughter, for as such I shall regard her. Now. dear, good- 
night. I am tired. Ring the bell for the maid, will you ? " 
He did so, and then by an afterthought said : 
"You remember that I have to go away. You will speak 
to Edith, won't you ? " 

"Of course, my love, when Edith speaks to me," the old 
lady replied, with gentle dignity. "But why. under the 
circumstances, are you going ? " 

At that moment the maid entered the room, so he gave no 
answer, only made a few remarks about the manner of his 
mothers journey back to town and kissed her in good-bye 

When the maid had left again Mrs. Ullershaw, as was her 
custom, said her prayers, offering up petitions long and 
earnest for the welfare of her beloved only son, and that the 
woman whom he had chosen might prove a blessing to him 
But from those prayers she could take no comfort, they 
seemed to fall back upon her head like dead things, rejected 
or unheard, she knew not which. Often she had thought to 
herself how happy she would be when Rupert came to tell her 
that he had chosen a wife, yet now that he had chosen, she 
was not happy. * 

Oh, she would tell the truth to her own heart since it must 
never pass her lips. She did not trust this gay and lovely 
woman; she thought her irreligious, woridly, and self-seeking • 



leS 



TTbe Mai? of tbe Spirit 



she believed that she had engaged herself to Rupert because 
he was the heir to a peerage and great wealth, distinguished 
also ; not because she loved him. Although her son was of it, 
she hated the stock whence Edith sprang ; as she knew now, 
from the first Ullershaw, who founded the great fortunes of the 
family, in this way or that they had all been bad, and Edith, 
she was certain, had not escaped that taint of blood. Even in 
Rupert, as the adventure of his youth proved, it was present, 
and only by discipline and self-denial had he overcome his 
nature. But Edith and self-denial were far apart. Yes; a 
cold sliadow fell upon her prayers, and it was cast by the 
beautiful form of Edith — Edith who held Rupert's destiny in 
her hands. 

Within a few feet of her Rupert also offered up his petitions, 
or rather his paean of thanksgiving and praise for the glory that 
had fallen from Heaven upon his mortal head, for the pure 
and beautiful love which he had won that should be his lamp 
through life and in death his guiding-star. 



A while after Rupert had gone, half an hour perhaps, Edith, 
noticing that Dick had left the hall, as she thought to see off 
the last of the departing guests, took the opportunity to slip 
away to bed since she wished for no more of his company that 
night Yet she was not c'estined to escape it, for as she 
passed the door of the library on her way up stairs, that 
same room in which Rupert had proposed to her, she found 
Dick standing there. 

" Oh," he said, " I was looking for you. Just come in and 
tell me if this belongs to you. I think you must have left it 
behind." 

Carelessly, without design or thought, she stepped into the 
room, whereon he closed the door, and ab though by accident 
placed himself between it and her. 

" Well, what is it ? " she asked, for her curiosity was stirred ; 
she thought that she might have dropped something during 



BMtb'0 Crtt0be6 XiUes 



109 



her interview with Rupert. "Where is it? What have 
I lost?" 

" That's just what I want to ask you," he answered, with a 
scarcely suppressed sneer. "Is it perhaps what you are 
pleased to call your heart?" 

" I beg your pardon ? " said Edith interrogatively. 

" Well, on the whole, you may have reason to do so. Come, 
Edith, no secrets between old friends. Why do you wear 
that ring upon your finger? It was on Ullershaw's this 
morning." 

She reflected a moment, then with characteristic courage 
came to tlie conclusion that she might as well get it over at 
once. The same instinct that had prompted her to become 
engaged to Rupert within half an hour of having made up her 
mind to the deed, made her determine to take the opportunity 
to break once and for all with her evil genius, Dick. 

" Oh," she answered calmly, " didn't I tell you ? I meant 
to in the hall. Why, for the usual reason that one wears a ring 
upon that finger — because I am engaged to him." 

Dick went perfectly white, and his black eyes glowed in his 
head like half-extinguished fires. 

" You false— " 

She held up her hand, and he left the sentence unfinished. 

"Don't speak that which you might regret and I might 
remember, Dick; but since you force me to it, listen for a 
moment to me, and then let us say good-night, or good-bye, 
as you wish. I have been faithful to that old, silly promise, 
wrung from me as a girl. For you I have lost opportunity 
after opportunity, hoping that you would mend, imploring you 
to mend, and you, you know well how you have treated me, 
and what you are to-day, a discredited man, the toady of Lord 
Devene, living on his bounty because you are useful to him. 
Yet I clung to you who am a fool, and only this morning I 
made up my mind to reject Rupert also. Then you played 
that trick at the shooting; you pretended not to see that I 



~> 'I 



no 



XCbc Map of tbc Spirit 



wa, hurt, you pretended that you did not fire the shot, because 
you are mean and were afraid of Rupert. I tell you that «1 
sat upon the ground there and understood, in a flash I saw 
you a, you are. and I had done with you. C .,pare your^^rf 

11T..T '"VT '^'" ""'*"^^^"^- A"d "°^ '"ove away 
from that door and let me go." 

"I understand perfectly well that Rupert is the heir to a 
peerage and I am noV he answered, who saw that, being 

votZf ;i> " °?^ ^'^*^ ''' ^" ' ^'='^- "^'- *>-e sold 

for and he snapped h.s fingers. '• Oh, don't take the trouble 

t too V '' r """^ '°" ^°"'^' *"^ y°" J^"^''^ »hat I know 
^ too. You have just made a fool of him to suit yourself, as 
you can with most men when you please, and though I don' 

Xt^r' ^^°"^ '''' ' *^" ^- ' - -' ^or t; 

••Have you done?" asked Edith ca'-ily. 

•• No, not yet. You sneer at me and turn up your eves- 
yes, you-because I am not a kind of saint fit to go in double 
aamess wuh this Rupert, and becaus?, not being the next he r 
to great rank and fortune. I haven't been plastered over with 
decorations hke he has for shooting savages in the Soudan 
because, too. as I must live somehow. I do so out of Devene 
Well, my most immaculate Edith, and how do you live 
yourself? Who paid for that pretty dress upon your ba^k 
and those pearls? Not Rupert as yet, I suppose? Where 

olr"l wLh '"°"? 'T '^"'^ ^'^^'^ y°" ^«^P«d me 
once ? I wish you would tell me, because I have never seen 

you^ work, and I would like to have the secret of Xy": 

perfectly well know the answer, Dick? Of course George 
has helped me. Why shouldn't he. as he can quite weH 

toti:°' '"^'^.^'^^ o^ ^^^ family? Now iTm goT^g 
to help myself in the only way a woman can, by prudenf 



BWtb'0 Crusbe5 XUfes 



III 

••Good Lord!" said Dick, with a bitter laugh. "What a 
g^dge he „u.t have against the man to set you on to marry 

a^ut the JT-T'". '''''' '' ^°'"*^^'''"« •" «» that owJk 
about the saint m h,s boyhood and the lovely and lamented 

virtuous EdUh. that whatever I am-and I don't set up or much 

own w^Idl! ' ' ^"'^ "' '■* ^"'^^^ y°" ' yo" -ho for your 
own worldly reasons never would marrv or - ven h./nZ 

openly engaged to me. although you sS ^ouCd me"" 

he attSoTafr^cr';^ ^" "^"'" ^^"^^ ^-' ^^ '- 

ner attitude of affected mdifference to this tirade. " I never 

and iT' '"^ '°^ ' '''' ^^ reason, because I don't 

and never d,d. you or any other man. I can't-as L h- ^ 
one day perhaps I shall, and then-I may have snid th! ' 

doi W.n ! ^'■^"*'*^ *^^* ^ "O'^an n^eans what she 

«"«6cu my ways, but though you were * a^ttntrt^A > ♦!,:- 
you would never do because we Ihould haJe C ^r' S» 
you sen, u,e off.0 othe,^ and .hen, when i. a„^ed Z ir^ 



113 



TTbe Mav of tbe Spfrft 



own wrong-doing upon the heads of others. So far from 
ruining you, I tried to save you. You say that I played with 
you ; it is not the truth. The truth is, that from time to time 
I associated with you again, hoping against hope that you 
might have reformed. Could I have believed that you meant 
to turn over a new leaf, I think that I would have risked all 
and married you, but, thank God ! I was saved irom that. 
And now I have done with you. Go your way, and let me 
go mine." 

" Done with me ? Not quite, I think, for perhaps the old 
' attraction ' still remains, and with most women ihat means 
repulsion from other men. Let us see now," and suddenly, 
without giving her a single* hint of his intention, he caught 
her in his arms and kissed her passionately. "There," he 
said, as he let her go; '*) perhaps you will forgive an old 
lover—although you are engaged to a new one?" 

" Dick," she said, in a low voice, " listen to me and 
remember this. If you touch me like that again, I will go 
straight to Rupert and I think he would kill you. As I am 
not strong enough to protect myself from insult, I must find 
one who is. More, you talk as though I had been in the 
habit of allowing you to embrace me, perhaps to pave the 
way for demands of blackmail. What are the facts ? Eight 
or nine years ago, when I made that foolish promise, you 
kissed me once, and never again from that hour to this. 
Dick, you coward ! I am indeed grateful that I never 
felt more than a passing attraction for you. Now open 
that door, or I ring the bell and send for Colonel 
Ullershaw." 

So Dick opened it, and without another word she swept 
past him. 

Edith reached her room so thoroughly upset that she did 
what she had not done since her mother's death — sat down 
and cried. Like other people, she had her good points, and 
when she seemed to be worst, it wa^ not really of her own 



S5itb'0 Cxwbtb Xilfes 



"3 



will, but because drcumitances overwhelmed her. She could 
not help it if she liked, or, as she put it, had been "attracted" 
by Dick, with whom she was brought up, and whose ingrained 
natural weakness appealed to that sense '^f protection which is 
10 rammon among women, and iinds it* last exptMsion in the 
joys and fears of motherhood. 

Every word she had spoken to him was true. Before she 
was out of licr teens, overborne by his passionate attack, she 
had made some conditional promise that she would marry 
him at an undefined date in the future, and it was then for 
the first and— until this night — the last time that he had 
kissed her. She had done her best to keep him straight, an 
utterly impossible task, for his ways wtre congenitally crooked, 
and during those periods when he seemed to mend, had 
received him back into her favour. Only that day she had 
at last convinced herself that he was beyond hope, with the 
rssults which we know. And now he had- behaved thus, 
insulting her in a dozen directions with the gibes of his bitter 
tongue, and at last most grossly by taking advantage of his 
streiigth and opportunity to do what he had done. 

The worst of it was that she could not be as angry with him 
as she ought, perhaps because she knew that his outrageous 
talk and behaviour sprang from the one true and permanent 
thing in the fickle constitution of Dick's character — his love 
for her. That love, indeed, was of the most unsatisfactory 
kind. For instance, it did not urge him on to honest effort, 
or suffice to keep him straight, in any sense. Yet it existed, 
and must be reckoned with, nor was she upon whom it was 
outpoured the person likely to take too harsh a view even of 
its excesses. She could ruin Dick if she liked. A word to 
Lord Devene, and another to Rupert, would be sufficient to 
tiim him out to starve upon the world, so that within six 
months he might be sought for and found upon the box of a 
hsnsom cab, or in the bunk of a Salvation Army shelter. 
Yet she knew that she would never speak ^"^ .-ds, and 

H 



««4 



Zbt m$v ot tbe SiMiit 



that he knew it alsa AUs i even thow insolent kiues of hit 
had angered rather than outraged her; after them the did 
not rub her iace with her handkerchief as the had done once 
that day. 

Again, it was not her fault if she shrank from Rupert, whom 
she ought to, and theoretically did, adore ^ was in her 
blood, and she was not mistress of her blood ; for all her 
strength and will she was but a feather blown by the wind, 
a' as yet she could find no weight to enable her to stand 
aga..iSt that wind. Still, her resolution never wavere \ ; she 
had m«de up her mind to marry Rupert— yes, and to make 
him as good a wife as she could be, and marry him she would. 
Now there were dangers ahead of her. Someone might have 
seen her go into that library with Dick at near one o'clock in 
the morning. Dick himseif might drop hints ; he was capable 
of it, or worse. She must take her precautions. For a 
moment Edith thought, then going to a table, took a piece of 
paper and wrote upon it : 

" \st January, s km. 
"To Rlpirt.—A promise for the New Year, and a re- 
membrance of the old, fiom her who loves him best of all 
upon the earth. i«£m 

Thin she directed an envelope, and on the top of it wrote 
that it was tn be delivered to Colonel UUershaw before he lefc, 
and took from her breast the lilies she had worn, which she 
was sure he would know again, purposing to enclose them in 
the letter, only to find that in her efforts to free herself 
firom Dick, they had been crushed to a i^hapeless mass. 
Almost did Edith begin to weep again with vexation, for she 
could think of nothing else to send, and was ^oo weary to 
compose another letter. At this moment she remembered 
that these were not all the lilies which the gardener h>^d sent 
up to her. In a glass stood the remainder of then. She 



' 



SMtb's Cnl0lx^ luies 



"5 



went to it, and carefully counted out an equal number of 
tprajrt and leaves, tied them with the tame wire, and having 
thrown thoie that were broken into the grate to bum, enclosed 
them in the envelope. 

"He will never know the difference," she murmured to 
herself with a dreary little smile, "for when they are in love 
who can tell the false from the true ? " 



CHAPTER IX 



RUPERT ACCEPTS A MISSION 



The interval between the ist of January and the 13th of 
April, the day of Rupert's marriage, may be briefly passed 
over. All the actors are on the scene, except those who have 
to arrive out of the Soudanese desert ; their characters and 
objects are known, and it remains only to follow the develop- 
ment of the human forces which have been set in motion to 
their inevitable end, whatever that may be. 

The choosing of this date, the 13th, which chanced to be a 
Friday, was one of the grim little jokes of Lord Devene, from 
whose house the marriage was to take place ; a public protest 
against the prevalence of vulgar superstitions by one who held 
all such folly in contempt. To these Rupert, a plain-sailing 
man who believed his days to be directed from above, was 
certainly less open than most, although even he, by choice, 
would have avoided anything that might suggest unpleasant 
thoughts. Edith, however, neglectful as she was of any form 
of religion, still felt such ancienc and obscure influences, and 
protested, but in vain. The date suited him, said her cousin. 
There were reasons why the marriage could not take place 
before, and on Saturday, the 14th, he had to go away for a 
fortnight to be present in Lancashire at an arbitration which 
would be lengthy, and held in situ, as to legal matters connected 
with his coal-mines. So she yielded, and the invitations were 
issued for Friday, the 13th of April. 

Meanwhile things went on much as might be expected. 
Rupert sat in Edith's pocket and beamed on her all day, never 

116 



lUtpert accepts a Aission 



117 



guessing, poor, blind man, that at times he bored her almost 
to madness. Still she played her part faithfully and well, 
paying him back word for word and smile for smile, if not 
always tenderness for tenderness. Mrs. Ullershaw, having 
shaken off her preliminary fears and doubts, was cheerful in 
her demeanour, and being happy in the happiness of her son, 
proclaimed on every occasion her complete contentment with 
the match. Lord Devene appeared pleased also, as indeed 
he was, and lost no opportunity of holding up Rupert as a 
model lover, while that unfortunate man writhed beneath his 
sarcasms. -^ 

Thus once— it was after one of those Grosvenor Square 
dinners which Rupert hated so heartily, he found a chance of 
pointing a moral in his best manner. Rupert, as usual, had 
planted himself by Edith in a corner of the room, whence, 
much as she wished it, she could not escape, making of her 
and himself the object of the amused attention of the 
company. 

"Look at them," said Lord Devene, who had unexpectedly 
entered, with a smile and a wave of the hand that made 
everybody laugh, especially Dick, who found their aspect 
absurd. 

"Rupert, do get up," said Edith; "they are lauahine 
at us." ^ ** 

"Then let them laugh," he grumbled, as he obeyed, 
following her sheepishly to the centre of the room. 

While they advanced, some new sally which they could not 
hear provoked a fresh outburst of merriment. 

" What is it that amuses you ? " asked Rupert crossly. 

"Ach, Rupert," said Lady Devene, "they laugh at you 
because you do like to sit alone with your betrothed; but I 
do not laugh, I think it is quite proper." 
^^ "Tabitha puts it too roughly," broke in Lord Devene. 
"We are not making fun of beauty and valour completing 
each other so charmingly in that far corner, we are paying 



mmm 



ii8 



TTbe TPOai? of tbe Spirit 



them our tribute of joyous and respectful admiration. I 
confess that it delights me, who am getting old and cynical, to 
see people so enraptured by mere companionship. That, my 
dear Rupert, is what comes of not being blas^. With the 
excellent Frenchman, you can say: 'J'aime 6perdument et 
pour toujours car je n'ai jamais ^parpill^ mon coeur ; le parfait 
amour c'est la couronne de la vertu.' Now you reap the rich 
reward of a youth which I believe to have been immaculate. 
Happy is the man who, thrusting aside, or being thrust aside 
of opportunity, reserves his first great passion for his wife." 

A renewed titter greeted this V'^iy elaborate sarcasm, for 
so everyone felt it to be, especially Rupert, who coloured 
violently. Only Lady Devene came to his aid and tried to 
cover his confusion. 

" Bah ! " she said, " your wit, George, seems to smell of 
the lamp and to have a nasty sting in its tail. Why should 
you mock at these young people because they are honest 
enough to show that they are fond of each other, as they 
ought to be ? Pay no attention and go back to your comer, my 
dears, and I will come and sit in front of you ; or at least tell 
them they should be sorry they cannot say they have not 
scattered their hearts about; that is what the French word 
means, doesn't it ? " 

Then in the amusement that was caused by Lady Devene's 
mixed metaphors and quaint suggestion that with her ample 
form she should shelter the confidences of Rupert and Edith 
from prying eyes, the joke was turned from them to her, as 
she meant that it should be, and finally forgotten. But 
neither Rupert nor Edith forgot it. Never again did they sit 
close together in that Grosvenor Square drawing-room, even in 
the fancied absence of Lord Devene, a result for which Edith, 
who hated such public demonstrations, was truly grateful. 

For a while after the announcement of the engagement 
Rupert and Dick had seen as little of each other as was 
possible, the former, because he had not forgiven Dick's 



llnpert accepts a Afssfon 



119 



I 



1 



conduct at the shooting party, which impressed his mind far 
more than the vague talk about him and Edith in the past 
In this, indeed, he had never believed, and his nature being 
utterly unsuspicious, it was now totally forgotten. As for 
Dick, he had his own reasons for the avoidance of his 
successful rival, whom all men and women united to honour. 
By d^ees, however, Edith, who lived in perpetual fear of 
some passionate outburst from Dick, managed to patch up 
their differences, at least to the outward eye, for the abyss 
between them was too wide to be ever really bridged. Indeed, 
hereffo.js in this direction nearly resulted in what she most 
wanted to avoid, an open quarrel. 

It came about in this fashion. The opportunity which had 
been foreseen arose; the sitting member for that county 
division in which Lord Devene lived had retired, and Dick 
was put up to contest the seat in the Radical interest against a 
strong and popular Conservative candidate. His chances of 
success were fair, as the constituency was notoriously fickle, 
and public feeling just then was running against the Tories. 
Also Lord Devene, although as a peer he could take no active 
part in the election, was using his great wealth and int'^est in 
every legitimate way to secure his nominee's return. 

When the contest, with the details of which we need not con- 
cern ourselves, drew near its close, Dick hi i self suggested that it 
might help him, and give variety to one of his larger meetings, 
if Rupert would come and talk a little about Egypt and the 
Arabs with whom he had fought so often. He knew will that 
although country people will attend political gatherings and- 
shout on this side or on that according as they think that 
their personal advantage lies, all the best of them are in reality 
far more interested in exciting stories of fact from someone 
whom they respect, than in the polemics of party politicians. 
When fee suggestion was made to him, needless to say, 
Rupert declined it at once. Theoretically, he was a Liberal ; 
that is to say, like most good and earnest men he desired the 



lao 



TTbe mti^ of tbe Spirit 



fi 



welfare of the people and the promotion of all measures by 
which it might be furthered. But on the other hand, he was 
no bitter Radical of the stamp of Lord Devene, who wished to 
pull down and burn for the sake of the crash and the flare ; and 
hewas,on the other hand, what nowadays is calledan Imperialist, 
believing in the mission of Britain among the peoples of the 
earth, and desiring the consolidation of her empire's might 
because it meant justice, peace, and individual security ; 
because it freed the slave, paralysed the hands of rapine, and 
caused the corn to grow and the child to laugh. 

Now Rupert did not consider that these causes would be 
promoted by the return of Dick to Parliament, where he would 
sit as a mouthpiece of Lord Devene. Then Edith intervened, 
and dropping Dick out of the matter, asked him to do this for 
her sake. She explained that for family reasons it would be a 
good thing if Dick won this seat, as thereby a new career would 
be open to him who sadly needed one ; also that Dick himself 
would be most grateful. 

The end of it was that Rupert consented, forgetting, or not 
being aware, that as an officer on leave he had no business to 
appear upon a party platform, a fact of which Dick did not 
think it necessary to remind him. 

The meeting, which was one of the last of the campaign, 
took place in the corn-hall of a small country town, and was 
crowded by the supporters of Dick and a large contingent of 
his opponents. The candidate himself, who spoke glibly and 
well enough, for as Edith and others had often found out, Dick 
did not lack for readiness, gave his address, which was cheered 
by his friends and groaned at by his foes. It was of *he 
stereotyped order— that is to say, utterly worthless, a mere 
collection of the parrot platitudes of the hour by which the 
great heart of the people was supposed to be moved, but for 
all that, well and forcibly delivered. 

Then followed a heavy and long -wind J member of 
Parliament, at whom, before he had done, the whole room 



Itupert accepts a Aission 



131 



) 



hooted, while some of the occupants of the back benches 
b^an to sing and shuffle their feet. Next the chairman, 
a prosperous local manufacturer, rose and said that he was 
going to call upon Colonel Ullershaw of the Egyptian army, 
Companion of the Bath, member of the Distinguished Service 
Order, and of the Turkish Order of the Medjidie (he called it 
"Gee-gee," or something like it), and the possessor of various 
medals, to say nothing of his being the relative and present 
heir of their most esteemed friend and neighbour, the noble 
Lord Devene, and therefore intimately connected with every 
one of them, to address them. The gallant Colonel would 
not make them a political speech, as they had had enough 
of politics for that night (at this the audience enthusiastically 
shouted, Hear^ hear /), but he would tell them about the wars in 
Egypt which, although many of them did not approve of those 
wars, were s.ill interesting to hear about as at any rate they 
paid for them (more hear^ hears I). He might well call him 
gallant, as they would say also when he told them the following 
story, and to the absolute horror of Rupert, who was literally 
writhing on a back seat behind this dreadful man, and to the 
amusement of Edith sitting at his side, he proceeded to give a 
highly-coloured and garbled version of the exploit that did not 
win him the Victoria Cross, whereon a voice shouted : 

"That's all true. I was there. I saw the Colonel come in 
with the man." (Renewed and tempestuous cheers.) 

There being no help for it, Rupert rose, and was Wurmly 
greeted. He had never given his mind to public speaking, and 
although his voice was good and resonant, it cannot be said 
that at the beginning his remarks compelled attention. Indeed, 
after five minutes of them, Dick and his agent, counting him 
a failure, began to consult as to how the/could get him down, 
while Edith felt mortified. Then, as he wandered on with a 
long and scientific account of the Egyptian campaigns, someone 
shouted: '«Stow all that history book, and tell us about 
Gordon." 



Ill 

If 



^^BOnr 



132 



XCbc Ma» of tbc Spirit 



Instantly Rupert took fire, for Gordon was his favourite 

J 11"^?'^^'" ^° '^" ^''^^ *^°"' Gordon, ab^ut 
o ttr '""* ^""P""*' *"*^'-^"^« '^"d^rt^l^en at the eques 

whemin?°'^'"'"^,''""* '"'^ 'P^^"^'^ «ght against^over' 
whelming odds, whilst sick at heart he awaited the relief 

irn r.""' *°° ^^*^' *^°"* '^«^ journey to Lehimt 
death Then, quite forgetting the occasion and whom he had 
thl V"T'' '' ^^°'* '"*° ^ '«^y «l°q"e"t tirade ^ain« 
of Gordon" ""''""^ *° '^ '"^^"^^^ '^ ^^ »^« <^-^^o° 
To finish up with, in answer to the suggestion of a voice 
«! the audience that Gordon was not realf/dead, he actuX 
quoted some well-known lines of poetry which ' he haS^f 

" "' "*!!! "°* '^o'ne ""gain, whate'er our need, 

Frir "«~7V''^« happy, being freed 
From u,e deathly flesh and perishable things. 
And lies of statesmen and rewards of kings," 

and then suddenly sat down amidst a tempest of cheers 
-g^ with cries of ..Shame," in which thr:hole ^ m 

"Great Heavens!" said Dick fiercely, to his agent "I 
believe that speech will lose us the election." ^ ' ' 

^d you get him here for? Better have stuck to the party 

•^ir/!""!." ""^u' ''*"^^"« °" * ^°'^' bawled out : 
mastt ?"" '^' ^'««*" " y°" ^■^b«' « to vote for, 

his'IeS t"^"'*' "''' *'' ^°^^ P*P^^ ^'"'^'^''y f-r Rupert 
conf^I « >^^re reported nowhere else) described as "g^t 
confusion," which culminated in something like a free fi^t 



\ 






«ttpcrt acccpte a Itiseion 123 

In the midst of all this tumult, Dick, who was beside himself 
with passion, forced his way to Rupert, and almost shaking 
his fist in his face, shouted at him : 

" Damn you I You did that on purp.jse. ' ou've lost me 
the seat, but sooner or later I'll be even with you, you canting 
hypocrite—" * 

He got no further, for next instant Rupert's heavy right hand 
fell upon his shoulder and forced him to a chair. 

"You don't know what you are saying," he said; "but 
speak like that again, and I'll throw you off the platform." 

Then Dick, feeling that iron grip still upon his shoulder, was 
silent. 

Here we may close the account of this curious scene, which 
once more showed the undesirability of invoking the aid of 
inexperienced and too honest persons at party meetings. To 
Dick the matter was serious enough, but to Edith's surprise, Lord 
Devene, whom she had thought would be angry, was intensely 
amused. Indeed, he went so far as to say that whether Dick 
got in or not, that one delightful story was worth the cost of 
the entire campaign. 

When Rupert came to understand what he had done, 
needless to say he showed much penitence, and wrote a letter 
of apology to Dick, in which he "regretted having spoken the 
truth about Gordon in the excitement of the moment," and 
gave him leave, if he wished, "to publish this letter." Of 
this kind offer Dick did not avail himself. Under advice, 
however, he wrote back, saying sarcastically that the fault 
was hi.'., who should have remembered that "distinguished 
men of action were rarely adepts at public speaking, and 
could not be expected to understand the exigencies of 
party affairs, which seldom made it desirable to drag the 
last veil from Truth, however pure and beautiful she might 
be." He concluded by apologising, in his turn, for any 
words that Ae might have spoken "in the excitement of the 
moment." 



im\ 



134 



TT&e TPOay Of tbe Spirit 



.^rt^ ; "'" °'''' *^ "°* ^^'Set his promiw to be 

^MohT"u°',^**'' °' '"^**^ *^* ''^'^^'^ °f R"P«rt's hand, of 
which his shoulder showed traces for many a day. 

As for the end of the contest, the Devene money and 
in terwt prevailed at last. Dick being returned triumphantly 

»n »K-1 "* '"*"*"* '"*J°"*y of fifteen votes, reduced 

to thirteen on a recount. A few days later he took his 
seat in the House, where he was enthusiastically received 
by his party, to which the winning of this election was of 
consequence. 

Dick had not very long to wait for his first opportunity 

I h of April, two days before the marriage, he met and 
the hJJ,^''"^*"**'^" ^'th Lord Southwick in the lobby of 

"By the way," said his lordship, -rather a pity that 
Ullershaw is just going to be married; we have got a job 
that would exactly suit him." 

•'What is that ?» asked Dick, pricking up his ears. 
,u.? u T "^'^anted ^^o knows those rascally Arab 
sheiks who live about the frontier at Wady-Halfa-secret 
service mission, to get round them privately, you know: I 
can't teU you the details, not that I think you Jould givlme 
away to your people. The officer sent must be thoroughly 

cuT ir' ''''*^'^ *°' '^''^ '"^^ ^^^'tly manners and 
customs of the natives. Ullershaw's name came up at once as 
the very man. but I said that I was going to his wedding in 

Z l^r '° .*n ''' '°"^^"'' '^^^ °^ ^"J'O"* '^^ the -matter 
was left over till to-morrow afternoon." 

" When would he have to start ? » asked Dick. 

"At once, the thing is urgent; on Friday by the Brindisi 
mail, about seven o'clock in the evening, and you see he is to 
be mamed that afternoon. It's a thousand pides, as it would 
have been a great chance for him and for us too." 



Knpert accepts a AfMiott 



Dick thought a moment and light came to him. 

" My cousin Ullenhaw is a curious fellow," he said, "and I 
•m not by any means certain that he would let his marriage 
.1 st|M,d m the way of duty, if it were put to him like thit 

How long would this mission take ?" 

" Oh ! he could be back here in three months, but-er-you 
know-er-it would not be entirely devoid of risk. That's 
why we must have someone whose nerve can be really 
relied on." ' 

•• UUershaw Ukes risks. As you say, it would suit him down 
to the ground. Look here, Lord Southwick ! why don't you 
give him the chance ? It would be kind of you. It's a shame 
to take away a fellow's opportunities because he commits the 
crime of getting married, and matrimonial bliss will generally 
keep three months. Send for him and ask him. At any rate 
he will appreciate the compliment." ' 

"Don't think I should if I had only been married an hour 
or two, said Lord Southwick. " However, the public service 
must be considered, so I will hear what my chief says. Where 
will a wire find him?" 

T ^**i ^*^* ** address, and as an afterthought added that of 
LordDevenein Grosvener Square, where it occurred to him 
that Rupert would very likely be on the following afternoon 
suggesung that it would be wise to send any telegram in 
duplicate. 

" Venr well.." said the Under-Secretary, as he made a note of 
the addresses. " I will settle it one way or another to-morrow 
afternoon ; shan't get the chance before," and he turned to go 
One word," broke in Dick. " I shall take it as a favour 
If you don't mention my name in connection with this matter. 
Of course I want to do him a good turn, but there is no 

^Zl^"" '''" '"'^' ""^ ''^' '^' '""^ ' "'^^^ 8^* ^^^ 

"All right," answered Lord Southwick, with a laueh • " I'll 
remember." * ' 



136 



TTbe mmv of tbe Spirit 



"I don't think that Edith would see spending her honey- 
moon amongst the savages of the Soudan," reflected Dick to 
himself, with a crooked Uttle smile, as ha made bis way into 
the House "'Not devoid of risk.' Yes, Ruperfs friend, 
Gordon, went on a special mission to the Soudan, and did 
not come back." 



On the following afternoon about four o'clock, as Rupert 
was leaving his mother's house to see Edith in Grosvenor 
Square, where she had taken up her abode, a nesse.iger put a 
telegram into his hand, which read : 

" Come to the War Office at once. Must speak with you 
upon very important business. Will wait here till five. 

'• SOUTHWICK." 

Wondering what he was wanted for, Rupert told his cab- 
man to drive to Pall Mall, and within half an hour of the 
receipt of the telegram sent in his card. Presently he was 
shown, not to the Under-Secretary's room, but into another, 
where he found th. Secretary of State, and with him. Lord 
Southwick. 

"Prompt, very prompt, I see. Colonel tUershaw," said the 
former; "an excellent quality in an officer. Now sit down 
and I will just go over the main points of this business. If 
you undertake it, Lord Southwick will explain the details after- 
wards. You know the Wady-Halfa district and the Shillook 
Arabs and their headmen, don't you, and you can speak 
Arabic well, can't you? Also you have had diplomatic 
experience, haven't you?" 

•• Yes, sir, to all four questions," answered Rupert. 

" Very good. These Shillooks have been giving a lot of 
trouble, raiding and killing people about Abu-Simbel and so 
forth. According to our reports, which you can see afterwards, 



I 



Knpert accepts a Afssion la; 

they have been stirred up by a rascal call Ibrahim, the Sheik 
of the Sweet Wells. Do you know him ? " 

" Yes, sir," replied Rupert, with a Uttle sraUe, •• he threatened 
to murder me the other day." 

•• I can quite believe it. Now see here. We are advised 
that several of these Shillook chiefs, including the one who has 
the most influence, are getting tired of the Khalifa and his 
little ways, and are, in short, open to treat, if only they can be 
got at by someone whom they know and have their palms 
well-greased. Now, for various reasons, the Egyptian Govern- 
ment does not wish to send an embassy to them, or any 
officer who is at present on the spot. You see the Khalifa 
would hear of it at once and might come down on them. 
WhiJt is wanted is an envoy travelling apparently on his own 
busmess, or if it is feasible, disguised as an Arab, who will 
slip through to them quietly and arrange a treaty. I need 
not say that, whoever did this satisfactorily, would earn the 
gratitude of the Egyptian Government, and would not be over- 
looked at the proper time. Now, Colonel Ullershaw, it has 
occurred to us that you are the very man for this affair, 
especUUy as you would take our complete confidence with 
you." 

"I am much honoured," said Rupert, flushing at the 
compliment. "I should like the mission above all things, 
especially as I understand these men, one or two of whom 
are rather friends of mine. Indeed, the most influential of 
them accompanied me on a shooting expedition, and if 
anyone can move him, I think I can." 

"There would be risks," put in Lord Southwick meaningly, 
for under the circumstances his kind heart misgave him. 

" I don't mind risks, or, at least, I am accustomed to them 
my lora," said Rupert quietly. * 

"There is another point," went on Lord Southwick. "Sup- 
posing that you were to fail—and failure must be contemplated 
—It might be needful, as no forward policy has been announced 



ill 



Its 



TCbe m$v of tbe Spfrtt 



•t present, for those in authority not to Uke any official notice 
of the allair, which would possibly be used as a handle for 
attack upon them. You would, therefore, receive no written 
instructions, and the necessary money would be handed to you 
in gold." 

" I quite understand," answered Rupert ; " and so long as I 
am not thought the worse of in such an event, or made to 
suffer for it, it is all the same to me. Only," he added, 
suddenly remembering his forthcoming marriage, *♦ when should 
I have to start?" 

"By the evening mail to-morrow," said the Secretary of 
State, "for the conditions may change and will not bear delay." 
Rupert's jaw fell. "I am to be married to-morrow at 
half-past two, sir." 

The Secretary of State anu Lord Southwick looked at each 
other ; then the former spoke. 

*• We know that, Colonel UUershaw, especially as one of 
us is to have the pleasure of attending your wedding. Still, 
in your own interests and what we are sure you will consider 
much more, in those of your country, we felt it right tc gi- j 
you the first offer of this delicate and responsible mission. 
Situated as you are, we do not urge you to accept it, 
especially as in the event of your refusal, for which we shall 
not in the least blame you, we have another officer waiting 
to take your place. At the same time, I tell you candidly 
that I do not think you will refuse, because I believe you to 
be a man who sets duty above every other earthly considera- 
tion. And now, sorry as I am to hurry you when there is so 
much to be considered on both sides, I must ask for your 
decision, as the other gentleman must absolutely have 
twenty-four hours in which to make his preparations." 

Rupert rose and walked twice up and down the room, 
while they watched him — Lord Southwick very uneasily. 
At the second turn, he halted opposite to the Secretary of 
State. 



Kttpert accepts a Afsefon 



"9 

" You UMd the word duty. «r," h^. wdd. "«nd therefore I 
have little choice in the matter. I accept the mi»ion with 
which 70U have been pleased to honour me." 

Lord Southwick opened his mouth to speak, but the 
Secretary of State cut him short. 

"As Colonel UUershaw has accepted, I do not think we 
need waste further time in discussion. Colonel Ullershaw I 
congratulate you on the spirit that you have shown, which, 
M I thought It would, from your record and the judgment I 
formed of you at our previous interview, has led you to place 
your duty to your Queen and country before your personal 
happiness and convenience. I trust-and indeed I may say 
I beheve— that our arrangement of this afternoon may prove 
not the starting-point, it is true, but a very high step in a 
great and distinguished career. Good-day; I wish you all 
success. Lord Southwick will join you in his room 
presently and settle the details." 

"It seems a little rough," said Lord Southwick, as the door 
closed behind Rupert, "on his marriage day and so forth. 
Supposing he got killed, as he very lik.ly will." 

" Many men, as good or better, have come to grief in doing 
their duty." answered his chief, a pompous individual who 
modelled himself upon the Spartans, at any rate where other 
people were concerned. "He must take his chance like the 
rest Give him the K.C.B. and that sort of thing if he gets 
through, you know." 

"K.C.B.S aren't much use to dead men, or their widows 
either," grumbled Lord Southwick. "I rather wish we 
hadn'i talked to him about duty; you see, he is a 
quixotic sort of fellow, and really, as he isn't even to have 
a commission, there can't be any duty in the matter He's 
only a kind of volunteer on a second-class, forlorn hope, to 
prepare the way by bribes and otherwise for an advance 
about which nothing is to be said, with the chance of being 



IS* 



xr&e mais oX tbe Spirit 



repudiated as having exceeded his instructions if anything 
goes wrong." 

"Really, Southwick," said his chief uneasily, "it is a pity 
all this didn't occur to you before you urged his employment 
—on the representations of his family, I understood. Any- 
way, it's settled now, and we can't go back on it. Besides, 
from a public point of view, it was important to get UUershaw, 
who really is the only man, for that Major What's-his-name is 
an ignorant and conceited fellow, with nothing to recommend 
him except his knowledge of Arabic, who would have been 
sure to make a mess. With the example of what has 
happened in the past before our eyes, we can't commit 
ourselves in writing over a job of this sort. If he gets 
killed— he gets killed, and we are not to blame. If he 
comes through, he is made a K.C.B., and enjoys his 
honeymoon all the more. So don't let's bother about him. 
Is there anything else? No. Then good-bye; I'll be off to 
the House." 



;m>..pter X 



MARRIED 



Rupert left the War Office a very thoughtful man. He had 
spent nearly an hour with Lord Southwick, going into the 
details of his mission, of which he now realised the danger 
and complexity, for it was one of those fantastic em- 
bassies which seem easy enough to men in authority at home 
who are not called upon to execute them in person. All 
this he did not mind, however, for it appealed to his love of 
adventure; moreover, he had good hopes of bringing the thing 
to a successful issue, and understood the importance of its 
object namely, to facilitate an ultimate advance against the 
Khalifa and to help to checkmate Osman Digna, the chief who 

was making himself unpleasantly active in the neighbourhood 
of Suakiin. 

But what would Edith say? And on the very day of their 
mamage The luck was hard ! He drove to Grosvenor 
Square, but Edith was trying on her wedding dress and 
wou d not see him. She sent down a note to say that it 
would be most unlucky, adding that she had waited for him 
an hour and a half, and at last w^s obliged to go upstairs as 
the dressmaker could not stay any longer. 

So he went on home, for he had to change his clothes and 
escort his mother to Grosvenor Square where, somewhat 
against her will, she was to dine and sleep. It was not till 

tlnLT 'I '^u f "^"^^ '^*' ^* ^^""^ ^« opportunity of 
telling her what had occurred. 

Mrs. Ullershaw was dismayed ; she was overwhelmed. Yet 

131 



m 



«3« 



Ubt mais or tbe Spirit 






how could she blame him? All she could say was— that it 
seemed very unfortunate, and she supposed that instead of 
going to Paris, Edith would accompany him to Egypt. Then 
they arrived at Grosvenor Square, and further conversation 
became impossible. 

They were early, and Rupert sent a message to Edith to 
say that he wished to speak to her in Lady Devene's boudoir. 
Presently she arrived beautifully dressed, and began at once to 
reproach him for not having called in the afternoon as he 
promised. 

"You will forgive me when you know why," he answered 
and blurted out the whole story. 

She listened in astonishment, then said : 
'• Am I to understand that you are going oflF to the Soudan 
to-morrow, three hours after our marriage ? " 

" Yes, yes, dear. I had no choice ; it was put to me as a 
matter of duty, and by the Secretary of State himself. Also, 
if I had refused, I am sure that it would have been remembered 
against me; and as you know, it is important now that I should 
get on, for your sake." 

" Men are generally supposed to have duties towards their 
wives," she answered, but in a softer tone, for his remark about 
his career appealed to her. 

He was right. Edith considered it very important that he 
should get on. 

Also, now that she came to think of it, this swift and sudden 
separation would, after all, be no overwhelming blow to her. 
She seemed to have seen plenty of Rupert lately, and was 
quite willing to postpone that continual and more intimate 
relationship which it is the object of marriage to establish. 
Had she been what is called in love, it would doubtless be 
diflFerent, but Edith's bosom glowed with no such ardours, of 
which, she reflected, Rupert had enough for both of them. 
The obvious conclusion was that it is quite as easy to respect, 
admire, and even sympathise with a spouse in the Soudan as 



Aarrie& 



»33 



with one living in London. Then as she was preparing herself 
to admit, as grudgingly as possible, that this change might be 
for the best, however much it tore her feelings, a new idea 
occurred to her. Probably Rupert expected that she would 
accompany him at twenty-four hours' notice 

" It is dreadfully sad to be separated so :oon," she said, with 
a little sob. " I suppose that I could not come with you ? " 

Rupert's face brightened. 

"Well," he said, "you could, but of course there are 
difficulties ; not much time to get ready ; hot season beginning 
and the cholera outbreak that is really bad in Cairo and 
Alexandria, at one of which I should have to leave you." 

" I can't pretend, Rupert dear, that heat agrees with me, or 
that I should enjoy getting the cholera, which I am sure I 
should, for I always catch things, but at the same time," Edith 
answered, looking at him with her sweet eyes, " I am perfectly 
willing to take the risk if you think I could be the slightest 
comfort or help to you." 

" Comfort, yes ; h*-'- no, rather in the way," he muttered 
more to himself tb her. 

For a 'jtruggle was ^ j ^ on in Rupert's mind. He positively 
could not bear the idea of parting with his wife almost at the 
church door. It was a bitter disappointment to him, as it 
must be to any man who marries from motives of affection, 
and the very thought of it caused his heart to ache physically. 
At the same time, he knew that Edith did feel heat, for his 
mother had told him this, and the cholera was so virulent that 
he heard by letter from Cairo that every European there, 
also at Port Said and Alexandria, especially women and 
children, who could afford or contrive to get away, had done 
so. Could he take this utterly unacclimatised English lady 
thither at such a time, just out of selfishness, and at the 
beginning of the hot weather ? Supposing she fell ill ! 
Supposing anything happened to her ! He turned white at 
the mere thought of such a thing, and said : 



'34 



Ube mav of tbe Spirit 



\i} 



I I 



'I 



" Edith, I don't want to disappoint you, but I think you 
had better not come till th<; summer is over and we are clear v->f 
the cholera. Then you can join me in Cairo, or more probably 
I shall be able to fetch you." 

"It must be as you wish, dear," she answered, with a sigh, 
" for I can't set up my opinion against yours. I would offer 
to come out with you, at any rate as far as Egypt, only I am 
afraid it would be a quite useless expense, as I am such 
a miserable traveller that even the train makes me sick, 
and as for the sea— ! Then there would be the returning 
all alone, and no arrangements made about your mother 
into the bargain. However, don't you think I might trv 
it?" ^ 

" Yes— no, I suppose not, it seems absurd. Oh, curse the 
Secretary of State and Lord Southwick, and the whole War 
Office down to the cellars, with all the clans of the Shillooks 
thrown in. I beg your pardon, I shouldn't speak like that 
before you, but really it is enough to drive a man mad," and 
yielding for once to an access of his honest passion, Rupert 
swept her up into his strong arms and kissed her again and 
again. 

Edith did not resist, she even smiled and returned about one 
per cent, of his endearments. Still this tempestuous end to that 
fateful conversation did nothing to make her more anxious to 
reverse the agreement at which they had arrived, rather the 
contrary indeed. Yet, and the conviction smote her with a 
sense of shame as it came suddenly home to her, the worst of 
it was, she knew that if Dick had stood in Rupert's place, and 
Dick had been unexpectedly ordered to Egypt, not the sea, 
nor the heat, nor even the cholera which she <feared and 
loathed, would have prevented her from accomparying him. 

At dinner the whole thirig came out, except the details of 
Rupert's mission, which, of course, were secret, and ii cannot 
be said that the news added to the gaiety of the meal. Al- 
though his appetite did not seem to be affected, Dick was 



/Aarried 



135 



/ • 



most sympathetic, especially to Edith. Lord Devene said 
little, but looked vexed and thought the more; Edith sat 
distraite and silent ; Rupert was gloomy, while Mrs. UUershaw, 
who felt this upset keenly for her own sake as well as her son's, 
seemed to be nigh to tears. Only Tabitha was emphatic 
and vigorous, for no one else seemed to have the heart to 
discuss the matter. Like Rupert ihe objurgated the War 
Office, and especially the man, whoever he might be, who had 
conceived the idea of sending him at such a time. "A 
schemeful wretch" — "One without shame," she called him, 
translating, as was her custom, from the German in which she 
thought. Nor was the definition inaccurate, while the vigour 
with which she launched it caused Dick to hope sincerely that 
Lord Southwick would '•emember his promise to conceal his 
private but important share in the transaction. 

" Ach ! my dear Edith," she went on, " it is awkward for 
you also, for however will you get ready to start for the Eiast 
by to-morrow night ? " 

This 'vas a bomb-shell, and its explosion nearly shook Edith 
out of her wonted composure. 

" I am not going," she said, in a hesitating voice. " Dick 
does — " 

"Dick! What has Dick to do with it?" exclaimed her 
ladyship, pouncing on her like a heavy cat on a mouse. 

' Nothing, I assure you," broke in Dick himself, in alarm. 
•• She meant Rupert," 

" Ach ! I am glad to hear it. It does setfm to me that there 
is too much Dick about Edith, even when she is getting 
married; yes, and everywhere." 

"I really think that Tabitha is right; there is too much 
Dick," reflected her husband, but aloud he said nothing, only 
sipped his champagne and watched the play. 

Nor, although he looked daggers, did Dick say anything, for 
he was afraid of Lady Devene, and respected the acumen 
which was hid beneath her stout and placid exterior. Then 






136 



Ubc Ma» of tbc Spirit 



il 



I 



with his usual chivalry, Rupert, ignoring the Dick side of the 
business, came to the rescue and explained that he, and he 
alone, was responsible for Edith's stopping in England, giving 
the reasons with which we are acquainted. 

Lady Devene listened patiently as she always did to Rupert 
while he blundered through his story. 

When it was finished, Edith, who had found time to collect 
herself, said m a somewhat offended voice : 

"You see now you were unjust to me, Tabitha. I— I 
wished to go." 

Next moment she wished something else, namely, that she 
had remained silent, for Lady Devene answered with calm 
conviction : 

"Indeed-is it so? Then I am sorry you have not more 
influence with him. It would have been better that you 
sacuid go. Why did you tell him that you were afraid of the 
hot sun and of the cholera sickness? He would not have 
thought of it himself, who is afraid of nothing. Come, the 
subject IS unpleasant; let us go upstairs and talk of the 
weddmg presents." 

So they went and not too soon, for what between doubt, 
anger, and a guilty conscience, Edith was on the verge of tears 

That night after Rupert had departed Edith and Lord 
Devene spoke together in the library. 

" What is the meaning of all this ? " he said to her. " First 
tell me, who engineered this mission of Rupert's? Did you ? '' 

"No, indeed," she answered, with passion, filled for once 
with conscious innocence. " How can you accuse me of such 
a thing ? ' 

" I am glad to hear it," he replied, taking no notice of her 
mdignation. "Then, as I thought, it was Dick. Be quiet 
and listen ! Rupert's employment was suggested more than a 
week ago. I heard abo..;c it in the House of Lords and put 
a stopper on it. I know that Dick saw Southwick yesterday, 
because the latter mentioned it in a note to me, since 



/Darrie^ 



U7 



You can form your own 
"He would never be 



which time the idea has revived, 
conclusions." 

" It is impossible," broke in Edith, 
so mean." 

T /u-^,°" *"*? * ^'^^ '^^^ °^ y^""" ^°"sin, whom, for my part, 
I think capable of anj '.hing low. Well, it does not matter, it 
IS done and cannot be undone. Now of course Tabitha was 
right. I admire her power of getting to the heart of things. 
Whatever may have passed between you. it was you who 
would not go to Egypt, not Rupert who would not take you. 
You know well enough that you could have made him take 
you ; you could have refused to be left behind ; but you talked 
about sea-sickness and heat and cholera-he let it all out at 
table. 

Edith sat silent. As other women had found before her, it 
was useless to argue with tliis remorseless man, especially when 
he had truth upon his side. 

"Now," he went on, "why did you refuse to go? Oh 
pray save yourself the trouble of invention. I will tell you' 
As Tabitha says, because there is still too much Dick. You 
do not like the man who is be going to be your husband, 
t-dith ; you shrink from him ; oh, I have seen you clench your 
hand and set your lips when he touched you. You are glad 
of this opportunity to postpone your married life. It has even 
occurred to you." and he bent over her and looked her in the 
eyes, " that from such missions as this, men often do not come 
back, as It has occurred to Dick. They pass away in a blaze 
of glory and become immortal, like Gordon, or they vanish 
silently, unnoted, and unremembered, like many another man 
almost as brave and great as he." 

Edith could bear it no longer, but sprang to her feet with a 
cry of : " Not that ! Not that ! " 

Not that, as yet but a!j ♦h-'' rg-t eh '" 
" If so, am I responsible ? " she answered. " Did I make 
my own heart, and who forced me into this marriage? " 



138 



TTbc mwe ot tbe Spirit 



" Oh, please understand me, Edith. I do not in the least 
blame you for disliking Rupert ; indeed it is a sentiment in 
which you have my hearty sympathy, for no one can dislike 
him more than I do, or, I may add, with better cause. 
As for the rest, I suggested the marriage to you, I did 
not force you into that marriage; I still suggest it for the 
most excellent reasons which far over-ride petty personal likes 
or dislikes, but still I do not force you. Make this mission of 
Rupert's an excuse for postponing it if you will, after which it 
can quietly drop out of sight. Only then, remember, that a 
document which I have signed to-day goes into the fire, or 
rather two documents, a settlement and a will. Remember 
that Dick goes out of this house, and as a consequence, out of 
the House of Commons also and into the gutter which Nature 
has fitted him to adorn. And lastly, remember that henceforth 
you make your own way in the world and provide for your 
own necessities. Now you will understand that I force you 
to nothing, for where that precious organ which they call their 
hearts are concerned, high-minded women — like yourself — will 
not let such material trifles weigh with them." 

Edith stood still as a statue. Then drawing the rose from 
her bosom she began to tear it to pieces, petal by petal. Lord 
Devene lit a cigarette, and waited till the rose was stripped 
down to its calyx. 

'• Well," he asked, " does the oracle declare itself? I daresay 
it is as likely to be correct as any other," and he glanced at 
the petals on the floor and the stalk in her hand. 

" Why are you so cruel to me ? " Edith moaned, thereby 
acknowledging that she had found her master, and letting the 
stalk fall. "It is not manly to mock a defenceless woman 
who has many troubles." 

A shade of compunction passed across his steely face, of 
affection even. 

" Forgive me," he said, *• I do not wish to hurt you, but 
we are people of the world, and have to deal with facts, not 



Obattitb 



139 



I put the facts clearly, that 



with sentiments and fancies, 
is all." 

" What are your facts ? " went on Edith. " That I am in 
love with Dick Learmer. I deny it. I am not, and never 
have been ; but this is true, that he does in some way attract 
me, one side of me, even when with my mind I dislike and 
despise him. That I dne>t Hupert whom I am going to 
marry. I deny it ; but it is true that he repels me, one side 
of me, even when with my mind I appreciate and honour him, 
who is worth all of us, except perhaps Tabitha. As a father 
or a brother I should adore Rupert Ullershaw. Now you 
think that I am going to marry him for the money and the 
prospects, and from fear of your anger— it is not altogether so. 
I do not know if you will understand me, or even if I can 
make myself intelligible. But I tell you that although it would 
rum me, for I know you keep your word, I would do what 
you suggest and postpone this marriage as a preliminary to 
breaking it off, were it not for one thing. It is this. I feel as 
though that pereonal aversion which I have is but accidental 
and temporary, that a time may and must come when it will 
break down and vanish, and that then I shall love him as I 
desire to do, with my heart, my body, and my soul." 
Lord Devene stared at hex. 

" Curious and most interesting," he said. " No ; that is not 
satire. I quite believe you, and I think it very likely that what 
you feel in yourself will come about— probably too late. 
Meanwhile, to deal with the evil of the present day, are you 
going to accompany him to Egypt or will you await the coming 
of this— this psychological change of the inner woman ?" 

Edith evidently had no spirit left to enable her to reply to 
this barbed shaft. She only said : 

" I will offer again to go to Egypt with him. Indeed now I 
wish to go, away from all of you. And I wish, too, that I 
might die there, even of that horrid cholera,' she added 
fiercely. "But I tell you that I know Rupert, and that it is 



III 



140 



Ubc Was OX tbe Spirit 



now, as you say, too late. After that wretched scene at dinner 
he will never take me, because he will think that to do so 
would be to cast a reflection upon me, and to admit that it 
was I who did not wish to accompany him, not he who did 
not wish to take me." 

'• Possibly," answered Lord Devene. •' I have always found 

the loosing of knots very difficult ; the wise people are those 

who do not tie them." 
Then she crept away to bed broken and sore-hearted. 

After she had gone Lord Devene smoked two more cigarettes. 

Next he sat down and drafted a letter with great care, which 

ultimately he copied out, directed to Colonel Ullershaw, and 

put a.._,. 

Here it may be stated that Edith proved to be absolutely 
right Although he would have given nearly all he had to 
take her with him, when it was put to him on the morrow in the 
presence of Lord Devene, in ;>i^e of everything that Edith could 
say, Rupert positively refuseu to consent to her coming, and 
for the exact reasons which she foresaw would sway him. He 
was too loyal to do anything which he thought would in the 
smallest degree asperse her. When Lord Devene intervened, 
moreover, he only answered haughtily that he was the best 
judge of the matter which concerned his wife and himself 
alone. 

Thus, then, this question was finally decided. 



The impression left upon Rupert's mind by his wedding 
was hazy and tumultuous. Most of that morning he had been 
obliged to spend at the War Office arranging the details of 
his mission. Thence he rushed home to finish his packing, 
dress, and convey his luggage to Charing Cross, finally arriving 
at St. George's, Hanover Square, only a few minutes before 
the bride 



Aartfe^ 



I4» 



The best man, his old Indian friend whom he had gone to 
stay with on the day after his engagement, hustled him into a 
pew, scolding him for being late, tellinj him to put on his 
gloves and asking him what he had done with the ring, which 
was only discovered after great difficulty. Vaguely Rupert 
noticed that the place was crowded with fashionable-looking 
people, who all seemed to be staring at him, as he thought, 
because his hair was untidy, which it was. Then the organ 
began to play, and the fashionable congregation turned and 
stared down the aisle, while his ftiend trod on his foot, poked 
him in the ribs, and adjured him in a loud whisper to wjJce up 
and look alive, as the bride was coming. 

He looked, and there, folKiwed by her train of bridesmaids — 
tall, pale, lovely— white and wonderful in her shimmering satir. 
and pearls, Edith floated towards him up the aisle like a vision 
out of heaven. From that moment Rupert saw nothing else, 
not even Lord Devene, who gave her away. The brilliant 
congregation, the robed bishop and clergymen, the fussy and 
ubiquitous best man, the smiling bridesmaids, the stony 
Lord Southwick, all vanished into space. Nothing remained 
save the pale, earnest face of Edith in which the eyes shone 
like at dawn. Nothing did he ssem to hear save her 

whispered " I will." 

It was over; he remembered signing a book, kissing his 
wife and his mother, and driving with the former in a Uae 
carriage to Grosvenor Square. She asked him whether he 
had got his luggage safely to the station, and then it seemed 
that of a sudden, before he had even time to answer, they 
arrived at the house, where policemen were keeping a passage 
clear beneath an awning. As he helped Edith to descend 
from the carriage an old woman remarked audibly : 

"Pore fellow, he don't know what he's in for!" which 
struck him as an unkind saying. 

Then came the reception, a long, long ceremony, 
remarkable for the multitude of strange faces and for a room 



143 



XTbe muv or tbe «iptrtt 



set out with wedding gifts which were " numerous and costly." 
Champagne was drunk also, and the bride's heath proposed by 
Lord Southwick, who described her as one of the loveliest and 
most charming young ladies in London, a truth at which 
everyone cheered, for it was obvious. He ended with a 
panegyric on Rupert himself, briefly recapitulating his services 
and the distinctions which he h?(\ won, which were, he was 
convinced, only earnests of those greater distinctions that 
remained for him to win. Finally, he regretted that the call of 
duty, to which this gallant officer had never been able to turn 
a deaf ear, forced him to separate, he was glad to say for but a 
short while only, from his beautiful and new-wed wife. 

Rupert replied, thanking the proposer and the company for 
their good wishes. He added that there were trials which all 
men had to face unexpectedly, and this early and sudden 
separation was one of the greatest that had come to him, 
especially as it had obliged him to refuse his wife's first 
request, that she might be allowed to accompany him to 
Egypt, which he was forced to do because of the cholera that 
was raging there. 

Then he stopped, and Edith thanked him for his words with 
a grateful smile while the guests began to melt away. Dick 
sauntered up, beautifully arrayed, and remarking sympatheti- 
cally hat they had only three hours before the departure of 
the train, asked, in a voice loud enough to attract general 
attention, where they had finally decided to spend their 
honeymoon, 

Edith drew herself up and answered : " Here in London 
when Rupert returns from tbe Soudan, or perhaps in Egypt," 
after which public announcement, until they were together in the 
carriage going to the station, her husband found it impossible 
to secure even a private word with her. Again the subtle Dick 
had succeeded in adding one more course to the wall which 
it was his evil aim to build between Rupert and his wife. 

The one thing which always stood out in Rupert's mind 



/ibiirrieO 



MS 



above the level of the grey and dim confusion of this marriage, 
like a black mountain-point from an evening mist, was his 
farewell to his mother. While he made his last preparations 
for his journey, finding that Edith wai not with him, she came 
timidly to the room and sat by his side. Mrs. Ullershaw was 
sad, but strove to conquer her mood, or at any rale, to hide it, 
speaking cheerfully of the honour that had been done him by 
the Government and the advantage that he might hope for as 
a consequence. Rupert, too, strove to be cheerful, though the 
frost of gloom that fell on him, colder and yet more cold, nipped 
his heart and killed all joy. She felt it, and at length, poor, 
loving woman, her grief got the better of her and she burst 
into tears. 

" Oh, why does not Edith accompany you ? " she said. " I 
cannot bear to think of your going out there alone within three 
hours of your marriage. If only I could have had a little 
more time, ill and feeble as I am, I would have come with 
you as far as Cairo, for, my boy, my boy ! how can I know that 
I shall ever see you again ? " 

Then after his manner Rupert turned and faced the situation, 
simply and plainly. 

" You can't know, dearest mother," he said, " neither of us 
can know; but what does it matter? Sooner or later that 
separation luust come, but fortunately we are both of us 
convinced that it will be the last. Even to day when I should 
be so happy, I cannot pretend that the \\orld satisfies me; 
indeed it seems as full of pains and troubles as ever, for things 
have gone wrong and my anxieties are increased. Well, very 
soon the world will pass from beneath our feet, and then, as 
you have taught me and I am sure, the true life begins. This 
I promise, as I promised you years ago, that while I live I will 
try to be honest and upright as you are, so that at the last we 
may be together again. If you go first, then wait for me, as, 
if I should be called away, I will wait for you." 

She turned her streaming face towards him and smiled and 






«44 



XTbe Mai? of tbe Spirit 



there was something in the smile that frightened and thrilled 
him, for it was not altogether of the earth. 

" I know it," she whispered — " all, all. It is true, and I bless 
God who has tied us together everlastingly. They are calling 
you. Go, Rupert No, I cannot come, I do not wish those 
people to see my grief. Go ; and God's blessing and mine go 
with you, as they shall," and she laid her trembling hand upon 
his head in benediction while he knelt beside her. 

Then he kissed her and they parted. 

In the hall they were all waiting, Edith in the charming 
travelling-dress which she had designed for her going away. 
He said good-bye to them. Lord Devene remarking with a 
smile that he was afraid he was already beginning to find out 
that even matrimony, though it was said to have descended 
from on high, could not escape its share of shadow. Dick 
congratulated him warmly upon things in general and wished 
that he had his chance which, he was sure, would bring him 
every sort of good fortune, whereon Lady Devene muttered, 
" Unberufenl" and looked indignantly at Edith, and the 
saturnine butler, who, thrusting aside the footman, showed him 
to the carriage — for he was really attached to Rupert — muttered 
that he only hoped that he " should see him back alive out of 
them there savage parts." 

The door of the carriage slammed, the footman, with his 
wedding favour still upon his breast, touched his hat and 
sprang to the box, the coachman waved his white beribboned 
whip, and the horses started forward into the gloom, for rain 
was falling heavily. So at last he was alone with Edith — for 
about ten minutes. 

She took his hand affectionately, more she could not have 
done had she wished, since the passers-by stared idly at the 
blazoned, aristocratic - looking carriage and the horses and 
servants decked with wedding favours. She reminded him 
how they had driven together from the station when he arrived 
from the East, and said how strange it was that now she should 



/l^arrie^ 145 

be driving with him to the station as his wife to see him off 
Jgain to the East. Indeed she talked far more than he did whose 
heart felt too full for words, and who had looked forward for 
months to a very different departure with his bride. Suddenly 
he remembered that he had not given her the address to 
which she must write to him in Cairo, and the rest of their 
brief journey was occupied in his efforts to put it down as well 
as the jolting of the carriage would allow. 

Then came the confusion of the station, where porters, 
thinking that they were a couple going away upon their 
honeymoon, and finding out his name from the coachman, 
rushed after him calling him « Colonel," or sometimes « My 
lord," and were ultimately much astonished to discover that 
he was travelling alone by the Brindisi mail. Everything 
was arranged at last, and the pair stood together forlornly 
at the door of his smoking carriage in which there were 
two other passengers. Then as the guard called to him to 
take his seat, the footman stepped forward, touched his hat 
again, and handed him a letter with the message that it was 
from his lordship, who sai' riat there was no answer. Rupert 
thrust it into the pocket of his ulster, embraced his wife, who 
wiped her eyes with her handkerchief and tried to smile, and 
after another long minute which seemed an eternity of time, 
the great engine whistled and the train moved forward into the 
rain and the darkness. 

Rupert sat still for a little, while the image of Edith 
standing alone upon the platform faded from his sight, 
waiting for the confusion of his mind to clear. Then he put 
his hand into his pocket to find his pipe, more fiom habit 
than from any desire io smoke, and in doing so, found 
something else — Lord Devene's letter, which he had 
forgotten. 

What was ke writing to him about, he wondered, as he broke 
the seal of many quarterings and began to read. This was 
the letter : 



&4I 



146 Ubc mtcs of tbc Spirit 

««My Dear Rupert,— When you told me that you had 
insured your life for ;£io,ooo and settled the amount upon 
Edith, I intimated to you that I also proposed to make her a 
wedding present in money." ("So he did," thought Rupert, 
« I had forgotten all about it.") « I now write to say that I have 
carried out this arrangement. Under deed I have paid to 
her trustees, and settled to her separate use, the capital sum of 
jr25,ooo, of which the interest will be paid to her quarterly, 
she having the right to dispose of the corpus by will m favour 
of anyone whom she may wish. In the event of her having 
children, however, it is to be divided in equal shares among 
them at her death." 

"That's a lot," thought Rupert to himself. " I wonder why he 
gave her so much. WeU, it will make her Ufe easier." Then 
he went on with the letter and found the answer to his 
question. 

"Perhaps you will wonder why I am so liberal, so I may as 
well tell you at once what possibly you have guessed; what, 
indeed, although she does not know it, you must learn sooner 
or later. Edith is my daughter." 

These words seemed to stun Rupert. He felt the weight of 
the blow without appreciating its significance. Three times 
did he re-read them. Then at last their full meaning came 
home to him, and with it a knowledge that he must control 
himself, that he must say or do nothing violent, show no strong 
emotion even, for those two other men in the carriage, whose 
curiosity, it was clear, had been deeply excited concermng 
him, were watching him over the tops of their newspapers. 
He would read on and think afterwards. 

" It is very possible that my late wife Clara, with whom you 
will remember you used to be friendly in your youth, may 



Aarried 



M7 



have expressed to yoa, as she often did to others, her jealousy and 
hatred of Marian Bonnythorne. It was well-founded, though 
Clara, from whom I was practically separated for many years 
before her death, had no real cause to complain of the matter. 
Nor indeed had Bonnythorne, who, after a long course of 
n^lect, deserted his wife to go into a monastery, leaving her 
to me to support. You will not wish for details, as 
my present action will assure you of the truth of what 
I write. Nor do I intend to make any excuses. I look 
back to my intimacy with Marian Bonnythorne, of 
whom I was truly fond and who was fond of me, as the 
pleasantest episode in an existence that, notwithstanding my 
worldly advantages, I have not found delightful. I ,m very 
glad that Edith was born, as it is probable that she will prove 
the only issue whom I shall leave, and the fact of her illegitimacy 
does not in the least affect me, who have no high opinion of 
our matrimonial system. I regard Edith, indeed, with as much 
affection as though I could acknowledge her to be my child 
before the world, which, for her sake, I cannot do. 

" To proceed. It will now be clear to you why I forwarded 
this marriage between you and my daughter by every means in 
my power; why also I have kept the truth from both of you, 
fearing lest, did you know it, some of the absurd notions of 
which I observe you to be a victim, might lead you to be mean 
enough to break your engagement. 

•' I have no reason, Rupert, to hold you in special regard. Of 
one matter I will not speak ; indeed, though not of your own 
will — if you had one in those days — you did me a good turn 
there. I bear you no grudge, as I trust you will bear me none 
when you fold up this letter. But there is another cause for 
our want of sympathy. I have earnestly desired to have sons 
of my own, an inbred weakness which I confess has become 
almost a mania, but when I look for those sons, in their place 
I Key0u. You will inherit the rank and great wealth which 
should have belonged to them. It is therefore obvious and 



I4« 



Zbt mss of tbe Spittt 



natural that I should wish my only child to share these with 
you, and her children to take them in their turn. One word 

more. 

" I respect you. I think you have grown into a good man 
according to your lights, although they are not mine, and you 
have done what none of us have succeeded in doing before, 
earned yourself an honourable position by your own exertions. 
Therefore I can with confidence and satisfaction leave 
Edith in your hands, especially as you have chanced to 
become earnestly attached to her, and as otherwise she 
would in all probability have fallen into those of that 
scamp, Dick Learmer, a man of whom I warn you to 
beware-Very truly yours, ,, ^^^^^^ 

*'P.S.—1 am exceedingly sorry that this contretemps about 
your being ordered to Egypt should have happened at such 
a moment. You should have insisted upon Edith accom- 
panying you, for carpe diem and its joys is an excellent 
motto, and it is unwise to leave behind you a wife who is only 
so in name. But as usual, your own obstinacy and qui7:otic 
notions have stood in your way, since when Edith offered to 
go this morning, you forbade her to do so in my presence. 
I could say no more, and you must abide the issue. Believe 
me. I earnestly wish your safe return for both your sakes. 

"D.» 



Rupert replaced the letter in its envelope and thrust it 
into his pocket. There was nothing to be said; nothing 
to be done. Fate had him in its net. But oh ! how would 
it all end ? lie asked it of the night ; he asked it of his own 
heart ; but no answer came. Only the beat of the wheels as 
they rushed forward shaped themselves to words and said to 

him: 

"You have married Devene's daughtw. Poor man ! Poor 

man ! Poor man ! " 



t 



i 



Aarried 



Mf 



That was their song through England, France, and Italy. 
Then the thudding of the screw took up its burden, and 
chanted it until he saw the low coasts of Egypt outlined before 
him and set his face to duty once again. 



CHAPTER XI 



AN OFFERING TO THE GODS 



About six weeks after he had said farewell to Edith at 
Charing Cross Station, Rupert found himself once more upon 
the banks of the Nile and staring by the light of the full 
moon at the colossal statues that sit upon the fa9ade of Abu- 
Simbel. So much had happened to him since last he con- 
templated their gentle, stony ^mile that its unvarying sameness 
struck him as irritating and almost strange. Somehow, he 
expected that they would look different. 

Certainly Rupert looked different ; so much so, that if they 
had been endowed with remembrance, the statues would 
scarcely have known him again, for now he was dressed in 
tne flowing robes of an Arab sheik. These could not, as he 
knew, suffice to disguise his Western origin. Still, in a desert 
land, devastated by war, through which few travelled, they 
might, he hoped, render him less conspicuous to the keen 
eyes of wandering Arabs, or even of spies surveying bis little 
caravan from the shelter of a bush or the top of a sand-hill a 
mile or two away. 

For the rest, it was his intention, if accused, to declare 
himself a European, of the German race, making a journey 
to sell merchandise to certain sheiks whom he had been 
informed were anxious to buy at good prices. For this 
purpose he had a licence to trade, signed by the authorities 
at Cairo, in favour of one Mahommed, a German who had 
turned Mussulman, and whose European name was Carl 
Gottschalk. This merchandise of his, which was loaded 



* 



Bn Meriitd to tbe OoOe 



151 



' 



^ 



upon eight camels, consisted of cotton goods, sugar, copper 
wire, and oddly enough, a certain quantity of guns and 
ammunition, also what was a strange possession for a trader 
setting out upon a trip, about ;^ 1,000 in gold. All these 
things, it is scarcely necessary tc explain, were in reality 
designed to be used as presents to propitiate the wavering 
frontier chiefs, to whom he was the accredited envoy, and to 
dispose them to assist instead of opposing the forward move- 
ment which was then in contemplation as a first step in the 
re-conquest of the Soudan. 

He had started some days before from Derr, opposite to 
Korosko, with his caravan of about thirty camels and some 
five-and-twenty trained and trusted men, most of them 
Soudanese, all of whom had seen military service, although 
they were disguised as drivers and attendants. At Abu- 
Simbel he was to receive certain reports from spies, who 
had been sent on to collect information, and then to strike 
out into the desert to fulfil the object of his mission. 

In order that he might be able to think over the hazardous 
details of the work before him in quiet — for even at night the 
grumbling of the camels about his camp, which was pitched a 
few hundred yards away, disturbed him— Rupert entered the 
hypostyle hall of the rock-hewn temple and seated himself 
upon the dry sand that had drifted into it, resting his back 
against the third of the northern row of the huge effigies of 
Rameses II., which are clothed in the wrappings of Osiris 
and bear his crook and scourge. Here the darkness was 
relieved only by a faint ray of moonlight, which crept up 
the solemn, central aisle, and the silence was that of a tomb. 

When he had been in the place for half an hour or so, 
weary with thinking, Rupert began to doze, but was awakened 
suddenly by the sound of feet moving over sand, and looking 
up, saw two figures glide past him, one of them somewhat 
taller than the other, to vanish into the recesses of the temple 
so quietly that they might well have been ghosts of its ancient 



if! 

'S I 



n'- 



»5» 



TTbe mnn Of tbc Spirit 



wo«hippe«. For a while he remained still, wondering who 

at midnight, or near it, when all men slept. 

At first he thought that he would follow them, then 
remembered that he was not seeking adventures, and tha" 

so Ion] .' r Tr r"''' ""^ ^'' *° '"*^^^«'« '^'th them. 

Lie Lain t' '"'' '"!! t'°"'- "^^^^^f^'^' l>^'"« no^ wide 
awake again, he pursued his cogitations, purposing to rise 

presenUy and return to his camp to sleep'7 few^minut" 

later, ten perhaps, chancing to glance up the great temole. 

.where he was it looked no stronger than that of a distan* 
pUnet ma cloudy sky, or of a glow-worm amongst the toU 
grasses of a bank. This light roused his curiosity, as he 
guessed that it must have to do with the figure. Tha^ had 
passed him Probably they were treasure-seekefs, he eflLi 
engaged :n digging in the sanctuary, which in the day-timeThey' 
thl ftr V°\ ^^«^-^«hteven have found the secret of 
the crypt that he always believed to exist under Abu-SimbeT 
wh«e.n very possibly its gold and silver treasures were srill 

as Edith had good cause to know, was an ardent Egyptologist 
For a moment Rupert hesitated, then rememSringfha; 
there were but two of them and that he was armed, yielded to 
impuhe. or to the pressure of Destiny, and began ver; cautious y 
o creep towards that light. Down the long haU^e went 
feeling his way from column to column, through the dcor^^y 
to the smaller hall, and guided by the star of flame. downXt 
aho into a narrow transverse chamber that gives accessTo the 
central sanctuary and the apartments on its either side It 
the entrance of the holy place he stopped, and cautiously 
looked round the projecting rock that once had supported its 
massive door. Then-for this sanctuary is not large-he slw 
a very strange and interesting sight. 
On the square, solid altar where, for more than a thousand 



an Merino to tbe aot>0 



I 






153 

years, offerings had once been made to the eoda of V^r.* ^ 
the great Rameses. who wh«.n h^u °J7 8°°» of Egypt, and to 

self among thenimb^'r stod ! ' »• ' '""^''' ^^"^^ ^'^' 

a fashion as to throw th^ m«.» r • f- . ^«««^ays m such 
struck upo" L .haUetdT ^^ T ''^^* ^°™^- ^his light 
were w^hi ^?,^^^^^^^^^^^ «fj- ^^ the four gods tL 

desolated shrine : Ptah Ammol p » '*'""« ^^'^^ *»»«" 
Harmachis. god of D^wn cTownJ^'' k*""""' *^'"''«'^' *"<» 
disc of th; sun Airt'hev,? .'''*'' '^' ^'"^'*« °f *»»« 
circumstances seemed tl '^"^"^ "P<>° ^K under the 
are, the figuSof^o women'. T'"'"' ^^^" ^^'"^ ^^^^ 

Side Of the^ine ^f Z:7:iT.t:y'-^^^^^^^^ 
invocations. ^ appeared to be making 

Ivupert knew one of them at ««/.» •.. 
Bakhita. of whom. „„,i, hrDatl^^ri "" l*" °'* "^^ 
and noticed some Sne «h». rf^^ ''°"'' "»' *»«"■«»• 
not thought femomh, 1 r T'''''''"'"y''•l'«l»d• 
indeed. When hHta'atr :L = "'«"' °""' '*'""•»' 
gathered at Devene to w^lt u" """"« "-« "-"l-ny 

clothed in a darclinlr."™ "l"'" ^'"- ^he wai 

indeed, as he guess^ at „^ ' f ^ P™""'- "Wd". 

But on her Rupe^lhl h'^' ""V"" P"' *e pU,ed. 
.0 he. companir^nlt^e tlred"^" '°"^' *" ■' «" 

ands„UgL„"itL"^^t~«^^^^^^^^^ 
wore thin draperies — so thin ^f^""®" ^^^'^e. For dress she 
limbs were visTb throL " """^^^ ^^P- -^ 

gleamed like snow. AtS fe wai t "a "'h: ^ ^'^^ ' 
and set upon the dark. curi;„7i, u * ^"^^^^ **^ silver, 
sl-ulder,^.kethat^ftomet:^^^^^^^^ ^^^^ - ^- 

of gold, from which rose thetS of S^''" ?T' " '^'^** 
front of it the hooded asp. *^ '""' ^"*=' »"«* « 



154 tEbe mn of tbe Spirit 

Rupert saw these things and gasped, as well he might, for 
unless his eyes deceived him or he dreamed, he beheld what 
no man had seen for more than a thousand years— one of 
the royal race of Egypt making offering to her gods. There 
could be no doubt about it The dress, though simplified, 
was the same, and the uraus on her brow— which none that 
were not of the direct family of the Pharaohs, or tied to him as 
lawful wife, would have dared to wear— told their own tale. 
Moreover, in one hand she held a bowl of glass, and in the 
other a jar of alabaster, and fiom the jar she poured a libation 
into the bowl and offered it to Harmachis, saying, in a sweet 
voice, and in Arabic, Bakhita prompting her to the words : 

" Grant, I pray thee, O thou clothed with the sun, which is 
the symbol of the spirit, a safe journey to me, by blood the 
last of thy priestesses, and to this woman, thy worshipper, who 
is of my kin ! " . 

As she spoke she turned her head, and the light of the 
lamp fell full upon her face, and it was lovely as a flower, 
clothed with a kind of beauty that was new to Rupert, for 
never had he seen its like. The large eyes— dark, liquid, and 
lustrous— the broad and noble brow, the lips somewhat full 
and red, in type purely Eastern, the fine-cut nose spreading a 
little at the nostrils, the rounded, childish cheeks, the firm yet 
dimpled chin, were all set like a framed picture in the 
straight-trimmed, formal masses of that curiing hair. laVen 
separately, there was nothing wonderful about these features, 
but together, animated and illumined by that sweet, slow 
smile and the tremulous mystery of the proud yet pleading 
eyes, ah! who had ever seen their fellow? 

In his anxiety to witness more of this most fascinating 
spectacle, Rupert thrust himst ' further forward. In so doing 
the hand that supported the weight of his body slipped on the 
rock, against which his signet-ring grated, making a loud noise 
in the utter silence of that dead place. 

Bakhita, whose ears were quick as those of any fox, heard 



4 



n 



I 



an 9B€tino to tbe Oo^e 



«55 



i 



\' 



/ 



it, and wheeling round, sprang to the lamp, matched it fnnn 
the altar, and rushed to the doorway. Rupert attempted to 
retreat across the corridor, purposing to take refuge in one of 
the side-chambers which open out of the inner hall. It was 
too late. She was on him, so realising the danger of leaving 
his back exposed, he turned, and they came face to face. 

" Bakhita," he said, " it is I," for alrewiy a knife fluhed in 
her hand. 

She let her arm fall and scanned him. 

" Rupert Bey ! " she exclaimed. " So you are back again. 
Well, I have heard, also I always knew that you would come. 
But what do you here disguised as an Arab sheik ? And why 
do you spy upon us at our rites ? Oh ! I tell you that had 
you not been Rupert Bey, by now you were a dead man." 

Meanwhile, the younger woman, who had followed Bakhita, 
not knowing the cause of the disturbance, actually stumbled 
against him, then recoiling, stood still, and in her amazement 
slowly let her hand sink, thereby emptying upon his feet the 
contents of the bowl she held. 

It was a very curious sight— this big Englishman in his 
Arab robe, standing quite still and upright, lest any show of 
fear should bring about a knife-thrust, and the beautiful 
Eastern woman in her sacred but diaphanous garb, wearing 
the disc and the imposing emblem of Egyptian royalty, and 
slowly pouring her involuntary libation upon his feet. Its 
setting also was strange. All around were the great columns 
and carven walls, and staring down at them from beyond the 
altar those mutilated but still awful gods. 

" Put up that knife," he said, " and come into this side- 
chamber and I will tell you." 

Bakhita stooped, and lifting a dark, camel-hair cloak from 
where it lay on the floor near to the altar, threw it about the 
shoulders of her companion, drawing its hood over her head. 
Then taking her by the band, she said to Rupert : 

"We follow I" and led the way between th» columns to 



r 



156 



Zbt muy of tbe Spirit 



the first chamber that opened on their right It was a rough 
place, which probably in past ages had served as a store- 
room of the temple, peopled with many bats that flittered to 
and fro unceasingly, uttering thin cries. Setting down the 
lamp upon one of the stone benches or tables with which it 
was furnished on either side, she said : " We are your servants, 
Rupert Bey," adding, with her grim smile : " Have we not 
poured a libation to you ? " and she looked at his ;et wet 
with the contents of the glass bowl. 

•• It was not to me that you came here to pour libations/' 
he answered, laughing. "Now tell tuc, triend. What was 
this lady doing ? " and he bowed towards the younger woman, 
" for never have I been more curious to learn anything upon 
earth." 

" Tell us first wh;-. you were doing, Rupert Bey ? Nay, n(rt 
about your busin ^os— I know ^M that — but why you followed 
us into the - iCtuary?" 

*• For t! c ^ame reason that you followed me into the temple 
— by pure accident. I was seated at the feet of one of the 
columns when you passed me, though who you were I did not 
guess. Afterwards, seeing the light, I came to look. That is 
my story ; now for yours." 

" Mea," she said, " tell him what you will. He has seen ; 
but he is a true man, and I think will keep our secrets if he 
promises, especially as he knows that if he does not, then I 
will do my best to kill him." 

Rupert laughed, for he was not frightened at Bakhita's 
threats. Meanwhile the lady called Mea was searching his 
face with those wondrous eyes of hers. Then she spoke in a 
low, rich voice and in English, not Arabic. 

"Will you promise to be true to me, Gentleman?" she 
asked, in a curious idiom and speaking with a strong accent. 

" If you mean not to tell your secrets, certainly ! " he 
answered, smiling. 

" My secreta, they are very little ones, only babies so high," 






Bit Wetin^ to the Oc^ 



157 

and she held her hand near to the floor. " You see, Bey I 
live far out in the desert, and my people and I. we sUU old 
Egyptians though we cannot read their writings, and only 
remember a little-a very little, about the gods and what they 
mean. Now, dressed like my mothers when they pray, I come 
here to-mght with Bakhita, my aunt, your friend, to make 
Offering to that god with the sun upon his head, because I in 
much danger and wish to ask him to bring me safe back to 
my own place." 

"Where, then, do you come from, lady?" 

"I ? I come from school—Mission School at Luxor. I 
tired of living in the stupid dark, so I go there two year ago to 
lam all about the white people, and the English talk, and-" 
she added with triumph, "you hear, I learned him." 

"Yes," he said; "you learned him very well. And what 
else did you learn?" 

TT c^"*'^'- .^^'^•"g' ''"*'"«• 'rithmetic, gography, history of 
U.^.A., British Empire, and old Egypt, especially old Egypt, 
because I one of him, though they no know that who think 
me common giri, no one know that but you. Bey, who catch 
me in act of worship. I learn religion too, and think it very 
good, much the same as mine, only different." 

" Are you a Christian, then, lady?" asked Rupert agam. 
She shook her head, causing the disc and little golden ...r.e 
she wore to glisten in the lamp-light. 

" No, not quite Christian, only half, not baptized. I s^^ - 
If baptized, make old feUows-" and she pointed towards'the 
gods in the sanctuary, « angry and bring bad luck." 

"I perceive that in all things you are too superstitious," 
said Rupert, quoting aloud to himself. 

She looked puzzled, then her face brightened as the 
meaning of the last word came home to her. 

"No," she said, "not superstitious like beastly 
Mahommedan, only afraid. That why I come here in not 
decent night-dress," and she held out her little foot naked 



i5« 



Ube WUis ot tbe Spirit 




except for tbe sandal, and again shook her head as though in 
r^ret for a state of affairs over which she had no control. 

Rupert laughed loudly, causing the bats which had settled 
to flitter from the roof again, and Mea, who seemed to be a 
merry little soul, joined in his laughter. This made old 
Bakbita angry, and she reproved tbem both in a stern voice. 

"Do not cackle here," she said, in Arabic, "in the very 
house of the gods, though it is true that to one of you they 
are no gods, and already tbe otber has a foot set in that same 
path," and she glanced wrathfuUy at Mea. " Listen, Bey ! I 
make a request of you. I do not ask for myself, who am old 
and ugly, but for this lady. I have heard that you ride 
to-morrow at night-falL Now our road is yours, for I know the 
sheiks to whom you go. Give* us and our two servants leave 
to ride with you. We have good camels of our own," and she 
looked at him with anxious eyes. « 

" Why do you want my escort, and whither ? " he asked 
doubtfully. 

"Why? For this reason. Do you remember the Sheik 
Ibrahim, be of the Sweet Wells? Yes, I see you do. Well, 
he is an old enemy of our house. He asked for the lady 
here in marriage, and was refused. Yes, the dog, he dared to 
ask that after once, by ill chance, he bad seen her beauty. 
Now he has found out that we are going to make this journey, 
and his plan is to take her as already he bas tried to take her 
at Luxor. But if we were with you, that he would not dare to 
do, for he bas prostrated himself to the Government since you 
were away, and will not touch one whom be knows to be their 
envoy, although you may call yourself Mahommed, and be 
dressed like an Arab." 

"I am not sure of that," answered Rupert. "Friend 
Ibrahim does not love me." 

"No; but he fears you, which is better. With you we 
should be safe." 

" How tong do you wish to travel with me ? *' 



an Metfttd to tbe Oo^b 



159 



"Two days only, till you come to the pass in the Jebal 
Marru. There you will follow along the mountains, but we 
cross them, and go on into the desert that is called Tebu till 
we come to more mountains and a certain secret oasis among 
them, which we name Tama, where no white man has ever set 
his foot A vhile ago. Bey, you asked me of the lost temple. 
It stands there in our home, and I promise you this — let us 
ride in your shadow, and whenever you have leisure I will 
show you that temple in payment. Yes ; and the wonders of 
the burying-place of the kings of the desert who once ruled 
there, and whose child, the lady Tama, stands at your side. 
Refuse, and I swear that you shall never see them." 

" The bribe is great," said Rupert, " but, mother, I must 
not take bribes." 

"No," she answered, "it is your ' isiness to offer them, is 
it not, else why do you carry so much gold in your baggage ? 
Ah ! you see I have good spies." 

" So good," he said, " that evidently on this point they have 
misinformed you," for he was sure that she was but guessing. 
" Well," he repeated, " I must not be bribed, and pleasant as 
would be the company of both of you, I have other game 
to hunt" 

Mea drew herself up, looking wonderfully digniied 
nothwithstanding her lack of height, and said in Arabic : 

" My aunt, our request is refused ; it is not seemly that we 
should ask again. We will go down the Nile a little, and hide 
till our messengers bring us an escort. Let us bid this Bey 
farewell ; we keep him from his sleep." 

"Perhaps the Bey has not done speaking," said Bakhita, 
who saw that Rupert had but paused in his words. 

"You are right, mother, as usual," he went on, "and you 
know so much that I do not mind telling you a little more. 
It is my object to travel as a merchant ; in fact," he added, 
" I have taken to that business which is more profitable than 
fighting." 



'« 



i6o 



TTbe TRnay ot tbe Spirit 



Bakhita waved her hand to indicate that to attempt t j thtuw 
dust in her eyes was mere waste of time, and he continued 
smiling : 

"Now merchants often take women with them, calling 
them their wives or daughters, purposing to sell or to make 
gifts of them to great emirs or sultans, whereas soldiers never 
do. Therefore, perhaps if you were in my company I should 
look more like a merchant, so I think that if you wish it I 
will take you. No, no, do not bow to me, for my own sake, 
not yours, especially as we are not sure of the way to the Jebal 
Marru, and doubtless you can guide us. Also have no fear; 
all that I have seen and heard is secret, though one day I 
hope that you will show me t\at temple in the oasis. Now I 
ride to-morrow at moonrise as I wish to pass the Sweet Wells 
the next night when men are asleep. You and your two 
servants can meet me where the path joins the road beyond 
the hill." 

Bakhita seized his hand and kissed it. Evidently her mind 
was much relieved, and she was very grateful. Fearing l^t 
her companion should follow her example, Rupert, who disliked 
such displays, said to her : 

"Now that this is settled, are you not going to finish 
pouring your libations on the feet of the god yonder?" 
Mea shook her head and answered : 
" That I no can do ; the libation is all poured on the feet 
of the man. I hope the god will not be, what you call it, 
jealous, and make you pay," and lifting the alabaster vessel 
she turned it upside down to show that it was empty. 

" Then I will say good-night," said Rupert, "as perhaps it is 
best that we should not leave this place together. To-morrow, 
half an hour after moonrise, at the cross-paths, unless you 
should change your minds and go alone. Remember, I cannot 
wait," and bowing to Mea he left the chamber and groped his 
way down the ball towards the faint light that flowed through 
the door-place of the temple. 



an ©ftcrfno to tbc <Bo^8 



i6i 

When he bad gone the two women looked at each other 
Shr„ ' ""*' K^"' ^'•^ >'°""«^'' "^»ve we done well? 

"Perhaps." answered Bakhita coolly. ««If so. he takes us 
for his own sake, not for ours ; you heard his wo;ds' 
he do!!'.h J **° "<>» believe them. It is for your sake that 

IbrahTm I r" ^' ''''"'^' '^'' y°" ^'^ bis friend. I 

Ibjalum knows that we are with him. he will attack him and 

Ru'!,frtV''«"K^"'"''''^ ^'^^^' "^*"' ^ *" tow that 
tS fo' ''" :r "'"• '"^ '•' "^" *'« brave and 
^cort ir ""'"" ? " "'^^^^^^ ^°' "^ to find an 
7vlr J°u '°"' ''^'" y°" "^'^ y°" ''o^W a hundred 

desert, but bemg fnghtened because Ibrahim tried to steal 

you to bide here till we can send for them. Still, if you do 
not w,sh to tmvel with this Englishman, put on a blue rob^ 
and a yashmak and go to his tent to-morrow as if to sell con^ 
and tell him so, for I will not" 
Mea thought a whUe, then looked up and said : 

r^ur.7'vl '?° "^f *' ''*^^^ ""'^^ bim. for Fate made me 
pour the hbation o the god upon his feet, and therefore is it 
that I wish to travel with him." 



CHAPTER XII 



THE WANDERING PLAYERS 



The moon was up, and Rupert, in his Arab garb and mounted 
on a dromedary, rode at the 'isad of his caravan towards the 
district called Sheb, in which the Sweet Wells were situated. 
A few miles from Abu-Simbel, where the paths crossed, his 
head-man, a sergeant named Abdullah, drew his attention to 
four figures on white camels who appeared to be waiting for 
them, and asked if he should go forward to learn their 
business. Rupert answered no, as they were only two 
women and their servants to whom he had promised escort 
as far as Jebal Marru. The man saluted and said nothing. 
Presently the four joined the caravan, two veiled bundles, in 
whom indeed it would have been difficult to recognise Bakhita 
and Mea, placing themselves beside him and the men falling 
behind. 

"So you have come," said Rupert, saluting them. 

"Bey, we have come," answered Bakhita. «' What else 
did you expect ? " and without more words they rode forward 
across the desert. 

Presently, in the midst of the intense silence, far away as 
yet, they heard a sound of wild music that grew clearer as they 
advanced. It was a very thrilling music, shrill and piercing 
and accompanied by the roll of drums. 

' What is it ? " asked Rupert of Bakhita. 

"The Wandering Players," she answered, "and I wish that 
we had not met them." 

i6a 



Tl^bc Man^erittd IMayers 



163 



" 



,. 



< 



"Why not?" 

" Because they bring ill fortune, Bey." 

JsheTshr" "' ''''"'"''• "''°" "'*" *'^^ *^^y ^*"* 

" Then offer it to them and see," she said. 

Now they were passing a fold in the sand-hills, and on the 
crest of one of these hills, that to the right, Rupert perceived 
the Wandering Players. There were five of them, all seated 
upon the sand, and all so wrapped up that nothing could be seen 
of them, at any rate, in that light. The three who feced the 
caravan were playing upon bell-mouthed pipes, and the two 
who squatted opposite to them kept time upon drums which 
they beat with wonderful rapidity. As the caravan approached, 
this savage music grew very weird and moving; indeed its 
quality was such that once heard it could scarcely be forgotten 
It seemed to cry and wail, yet there were notes in it of surprising 
sweetness. ° 

"Give those players ten piastres for their trouble," said 
Rupert to his sergeant, Abdullah; and muttering something 
the man guided his camel up the slope towards them, then 
offered them the moneyr- 

They too not the slightest notice of him, only played on 
more wildly than before, till at length h. .hr.w the coins upon 
the ground pnd left them. 

;'I think they are ghosts, not men," he reported to Rupert 
since there are no people in this country who will not take' 
baksheesh." 

"Ripe fruit does not remain unplucked," answered Rupert 
m the words pf .he Arab proverb; "and that which falls the 
children gather." 

Still he wished that he had gone to look at the people 
himself. If only to discover what tribe it was that produced 
such remarkable players. Then they rode forward, and for 
some furlongs the penetrating sound of those pipes and the 
gusty rolling of the drums seemed to keep time with the 



164 



TTbe May ot tbe Spirit 



swinging step of their camels, till at last the music grew 
fitful and faint and died away in the distance. 

When the moon was down, about three hours before the 
dawn, they halted by a well and slept till daylight, Bakhita 
and Mea occupying a little tent apart, which their servants 
pitched for them, and the camels grazing upon the desert 
scrub. While the sky was still grey, Rupert drank the 
coffee that had been made for him, and sent two pannikins 
of it, with some biscuits, to the women's tent One was kept 
and one returned untouched. 

•• Who does not drink ? " he asked idly. 

"Bakhita, Bey. She says she touches no white man's 
liquor." 

" So you know her ? " said Rupert 

"Oh, yes. Bey," answered the man sulkily; "and we shall 
all of us know her better before we part, for she is a gipsy 
from the far desert, and has the evil eye. I felt cold all down 
my back when we met her Ust night— colder even than when 
that music played which is made by ghosts out of the tombs." 
"Those who remain silent cannot speak folly," said Rupert, 
in another proverb, and dismissed the man. 

Then they marched on, camping again in the afternoon 
until the moon should rise. That night, about one o'clock, 
they came to the Sweet Wells, and stopped to give the camels 
drink and to fill their water-bags. Rupert had arranged to 
arrive here at this hour when he thought that the sheik 
Ibrahim would be asleep and not likely to oppose their 
passage. For the same reason, he kept as far as possible 
from the town, if it could be so called, but soon saw that 
his progress was being watched, since men were sitting about 
on sand-heaps and in the shadow of thorn trees. Indeed, 
one of these rose unexpectedly before them and asked who 
they were and why they passed through the territory of his 
chief without offering a present 
By Rupert s direction the sergeant, Abdullah, answered that 



XCbc Wlan^crtttfl placers 



»6S 

retLTh! *^^'"^ P'f/ ''^^ ^°P^ *° »^ I'^^^f^i™ on their 
not aTh ' r^' '"''^' ^"'"^ ^ 800d present. He did 

no add. however that it was Rupert's wish to avoid meeting 
h« trucuent and treacherous man until he had bound ovef 
he powerful ,he,ks who lived beyond him to the interest, of 
Lr fZT'"^"^'"; '" ^' ''"^^' ^^ ^°"'d have nothing to 

Ws tX T "'-TJ "'° ''' «°"^ ^"^y -"h a number of 
h,s tnbe, havmg ndden towards Wady-Halfa that very day. 

c^Z r^ ^f *' *''" *^° ^«'«<^ '^'"en upon the^ 
camel, he asked whether the gipsy. Bakhita. "Ind he 

answered no, addmg that the two women were his 
reUhons whom he was taking to visit their families The 
man said no more, so with the usual salutations they passed 

"Why did you say that, Abdullah?" asked Rupert. 

ill lufk'^r I' '?f '' ^""'^^ ''^^ '""''^ female bringers of 
.IWuck are, we should soon have had the whole tribe of them 
alK,ut us. It « said everywhere that Ibrahim wishes to tak^ 
the young one, who is a great chieft.Jness, for a wife, and that 
he had sworn to do so." - 

"LJes are stones that fall on the head of the thrower" 
rephed Rupert, for he was troubled and uneasy, nd""; 
^shed smcerely that he had refused to escort Bakh ta and he! 
bea^t ul mece who made offerings to Egyptian gods to 2re 
a safe journey across the desert. 

alon^rofhis^^''^^"'^'^ ^^'' ^^° '^''^' *^- --is 

J rs^eiC fh 'f' "Z^"' " ''''' ^°^ ^^"* the lady here 
and Ae sheik Ibrahim, who. it seems, is really looking out for 

"What I told you. Bey." Bakhita answered. " In old days, 



m 



166 



Ube TPSUy of tbe Spirit 



when Ibrahim's tribe was the stronger, our people fought him 
and drove him back over the Jebal Marru — that was more 
than a hundred years ago. In the summer before last, when 
my lady of Tama and I, with a large escort, were coming from 
our home to the Nile, we camped at the Sweet Wells and 
accepted a present of food from the sheik Ibrahim. In the 
morning before we marched he visited us, and by misfortune 
saw Mea unveiled and was set on fire by her beauty, so that 
at once he asked her in marriage, the dog of a Prophet- 
worshipper. Having many men with us, I answered him as 
he deserved, whereon, growing angry, he replied that that 
which was refused could still be taken, but since we had eaten 
his salt, it must be done another time. So we parted, for we 
were too strong to be attacked. Now through his spies at 
Luxor and along the Nile he has learned that Mea is come 
back, which she did hurriedly when not expected, because he 
tried to kidnap her in Luxor itself. So it came about that I 
had no escort ready for her. Nor did I dare to stop at Abu- 
Simbel, for I heard that he proposed to attack us there so soon 
as you were gone, and there was no steamer by which she 
could descend the Nile again, whereof his people watch the 
banks. Therefore we sought your merciful protection." 

" I think that before all is done you are likely to need it," 
said Rupert, " and were I what I seem that would not trouble 
me, but now I am afraid." 

"lAJt us leave the Bey and take our cinnce," said Mea, 
speaking across h m to her aunt in Arabic. " It is not right 
that we should bring him into danger. I told you so from the 
first." 

"Yes," answered Bakhita briefly, "if the Bey so wishes." 

Rupert glanced at Mea, who had drawn her veil aside, 
perhaps that she might see him better. The moonlight shone 
upon her sweet face, and^he perceived that her eyes were full of 
fear. Evidently she dreaded the sheik very much indeed, who 
knew that in this lawless land where might was right, he could 



t 



Vbe ManOerittd plai^rs 167 

take her without question if he were able, and force her into 
his harem. 

" The Bey does not so wish," he said. " You are with me ; 
bide with me. Often the thing we fear does not happen, my 
lady Tama." ^^ ' 

With a grateful glance and a sigh of relief, Mea let fall her 
veil again, and both of them dropped back into their accustomed 
place in the caravan. At their next halt Rupert noted that 
one of Bakhita's two attendants remounted his swift dromedary, 
after it, had been watered and allowed to feed a while, and 
started forward at a trot. Again he sent for Bakhita and 
asked where the man had gone. She answered that he had 
been despatched as a messenger to their tribe in the hope that 
he would get through the mountains unmolested. His orders 
were that, could he succeed in this, he was to collect a 
hundred men as soon as possible and bring them to meet 
their lady. 

As it appeared, however, that the oasis which was Mea's 
home could not be reached by the swiftest camel under several 
days' journey, Rupert did not concern himself further about 
the matter. Only Abdullah grumbled, saying that he believed 
the man was a spy who had gone forward to make trouble. 
For Abdullah, who had discovered that Bakhita and her three 
companions were neither Christians nor Mahommedans, was 
full of suspicion, especially as he and the rest of Rupert's 
escort were convinced that the old woman was a witch with 
the evil eye and probably in the pay of the Khalifa. Such, 
indeed, had been her reputation at Abu-Simbel, to which 
Bakhita's curious knowledge cf events and private histories, 
together with her very remarkable powers of observation, gave 
much colour. 

On the night following that of these events, the party camped 
by some water at the foot of the »U|ged and barren range of 
hills knovr-n as Jebal hUxra, in the very mouth of the pass, 
indeed, through which ran the only practicable road, that was 



ii 



i68 



TTbc VBav or tbc Spirit 



used, though rarely, by travellers journeying from one desert 
11 i"*! •■■• J^' '" *"'""^* ^^'' P'*"^ ''^ ^en' narrow, a 

r„!. fl ! V" ^'■°*'^ "°* "°'* '»»»" fif'y °f ««ty feet wide, 

and flanked on either side by sheer clifTs. Here Rupert and 
Bakhita and her companions were to part, for his road to 

Lonl! fh' f '^\^"u "L"'^ ^^'^"^ ""' ^" «°'"8 »° visit ran 
*^ong the foot of the hills, whereas theirs passed through 

them. At the earliest dawn they struck their camp, which they 
«,uld not do before, since the road was too rough to attempt 
in the dark, and Rupert having seen that everything was in order 
for the march, went to bid good-bye to Bakhita and her niece. 
While they were thanking him very heartily for his escort 
m the fine language common to Orientals, which on this 
occasion was meant earhestly enough, Abdullah hurried up 
and announced, in an aUrmed voice, that a band of over a 
nnn^K "««' "ounted On camels and horses, was advancing 
upon them He added that he believed them to be the chief 
Ibrahim and h,s followers. Instantly Rupert ordered that all 
the camels should be driven into the mouth of the pass, and 

ttl ,h T\T^ '^'^ "^"^ ""^ " S^^'^ »"PPly o^ *""""ni. 
tion. should take refuge behind the boulders that were strewn 

B«khL'"r'*? **.'*''' ''*' contemplated. Then turning to 
Bakhita, he said quickly : . • 

J! ^7^'""='» *^« 8°°d and fresh. If you take my advice 
Jome'Iw' '"*• ^"'"''^ *''^ ""' "°* «^* *^^°"«»» - ^- 
BakWtasaid the counsel was wise, and ordered the cameL 
upon which she was already seated, to rise; but the girt seemed 
to hesitate. Stepping to Rupert as he turned away, she seized 

ht^uiirEn';r ' ^^^"' '-' '''''-'' -"^-^ - 

whn^v f'"]''" r."^ ^*"^*' "^^ °'^ "^^a" Bal'Wt*'' fault, 
who thmk of nobody but me, not of you at all. I-J 

Unnk much of you. my heart sick. I cry my eye, out. Good- 
bye 1 God bless you and damn Ibrahim." 



«bc tRBanderittd PUipeta 



1' 



169 

to him «L T moment a man came and spoke 

^r^ntZ, :il"d"'" V"^''"^ ^'•''^'■^ Mea..ndLr 
No7 . hTJ^^h^ '. T'^'"« ~""^ ^''^ '''^"'^ of »he pas,. 

rifl^ rL / '^"'^ '"''' ''"' ^'"P'"8' b"» 'o k«^eP their 

^"er ;'';r.,'^'^"r'^ '^ ^^"'^'^ -d "Other 

Pre^en^y'twlTm-'' ^Sj"' "^ ''"'^ ''°^ *"^ »'*<^ »^^'t<^- 
rresemiy two men rode out from among them in whnm 

Kupert recognised hi, old accuaintance t'he ,hl Tbrlht 

weii^'^ zz:ZT:: :'d?^' ^^^f - --^ ^^^ ^^- 

had peace. ^' * '^"^*"*=* "''«* ^ ^e 

tJ^hTk^'k^ ^?^ P**'^ '^"^ •*'" ^"''''^^d Rupert. 

his^^^^t'^to 1^^^^ '"' "*''^*^ '°^^'^ '^o"^ l^'ving 

until th^Jj^ .„^ '" ^'^"f- ^"P«« ^»o ''-Iked forward 
.« TU J exchanged salutations. 

Bey," wid Ibrahim, surveying Rupert's garb with his 
flashing eyes, "you have changed your dress^nce Ust we 
spoke yonder on the hill above Abu SimbeJ. M mf Lie 

Zhet'wt 'r" '"" ^^° ^"^ ^^°- « seizor he 
iTophet whom I can greet as brother?" 

aniw^^t'^''' "'"". '" "' ^''" brother at Abu-Simbel," 
answered Rupert evasively "What is your business She/k 
Ib«h>m, with the merchant Maho.nmed. whr^the ^ly 
offers you hzs congratulations, having learned hat now Z' 
also are a servant of the Government " ^ 

.ou Who are^ J^.^ ^^Z^i;^^^ with 
c«nnot''riJr?K''T'" ''"■* "^^'"'"8 ^ith me, Sheik, but I 
"Whither? "asked Ibrahim. 



f 



170 



TTbe mav of tbe Spirit 



"Redly, I do not know, it is their own aflkir," wid Rupert 
calmly. *^ 

Now the sheik's evil temper began to get the better of him. 
You he," he said. •• I will search your camp, for they are 
hidden there." 

"If you wish to find rifle bullets, search," replied Rupert 
significantly. " Listen, Ibrahim I I am camped here, and here 
I shall sUy until you go, since I do not trust you and will not 
expose myself to attack upon the road. If you venture on 
violence, it is possible that you may succeed, since my mission 
is peaceful and I have but few men. But then the Khedive, 
your lord, will stamp you out, you and your tribe, and so there 
will be an end of an evil and dangerous man. I have spoken, 
go in peace." , 

"By AiUh I no," shouted the Arab. "I come in war, for 
besides that of these women there is an old account to settle 
between you and me, who caused my town to be raided by 
the Government of Egypt, my women to be insulted, and my 
herds to be taken. Choose now. Hand over to roe your 
camels, your merchandise and your arms, and of my mercy I 
will let you go. Resist, and I will take them all and offer to 
you, infidel, tbe choice between death and Islam." 

"Empty drums make a loud noise," replied Rupert 
contemptuously, whereon the Arab, lifting the spear which he 
earned, huiled it at him. 

Rupert sprang to one side, so that the weapon missed him 
by a hair's-breadth. 

"Now," he said, "I can shoot you if I wish; but I will 
not forget my honour because you forget yours. Dog ! God 
will avenge your treachery on you." 

"By my beard!" roared the Arab, "I will avenge 
Allah on you— yes, your infidel lips shall kiss his holy 
name." ' 

Then Rupert walked towards his men, who were running 
out to his assistance. 



TCbe T!SUn^e1in0 pluvetB 



»7' 



y 



1 



"Back," he laid, "and take cover. Ibrahim i> about '.•• 
attack us." 

So they went back and, since flight seemeci u'terly im- 
practicabV, having hastily tetliered the camels in a recess of 
the cliff out of reach of rifle fire, lay doMv every man behind 
a rock. Her- Rupert addressed them, iclhng them what had 
passed, and saying they must either fiiht or be robbed and 
madrt prisonei,, which would pr-^hably mean their death, 
sine* 'brahim would not dare tc Ucw any of them to live 
and be witnesses against him wleu lu- v..^ brought to account 
for this great crime. Therefore, thoush ihcy v:rc but lew, as 
they, mounted on camels, could not tun hom horsemen, it was 
wise that they should do their best. 

The soldiers, who were all of them i),,ue me.i, answered 
that it was so, they were few, still they would fight and try to 
beat off these Arabs. Only Abdullah looked downcast, and 
added that this trouble came upon them through the women, 
and that it would have oeen good to give them to Ibrahira. 

" Would you think zo if they were your wives or daught.>rs ? " 
asked Rupert scornfully. •• How could I surrender them who 
had eaten of my bread and salt ? Also they have gone. But 
if you are afraid, Abdullah, do you take a camel and follow 
them. The rest of us will hold the pass and give you time 
to get away." 

Now some of the servants began to mock Abdullah and to 
call him "woman" and "coward." 

So the man grew ashamed and said that he would show 
them that Ik was as brave as they. 

Then a rifle bullet, evidently aimed at Rupert, who was 
standing up to address the soldiers, whistled past his head 
and flattened on the rock behind. The fight had begun. 

Rupert saw the man who had fired the shot from the back 
of his camel about two hundred yards away, for the smoke 
hung over him. Snatching up the Winchester repeating rifle 
which he carried, he set the sight rapidly, aimed and fire. He 



1 

1^'i 



m 



«7« 



XCbe mws of tbe Spirit 



was an excellent game and target shot, nor did his skill fail 
him now. Almost instantly they heard the clap of a bullet 
and saw the Arab^it was that very sentry with whom they 
had spoken at the Sweet Wells — throw up his arms and pitch 
heavily from the saddle to the ground. 

The soldiers shouted, thinking this a good omen, and at 
once opened fire, killing or wounding several of their enemies, 
whereon the Arabs hastened to take shelter, sending their 
horses and camels out of reach of the bullets. 

The mouth of the pass was strewn with large stones, and 
creeping from one to another of them, the Arabs advanced 
slowly, pouring in a heavy fire as they came. As it chanced, 
this did but little damage, for Rupert's cover was good, while 
as they moved forward his Hlles found out several of them. 
Thus things went on for a full hour, till at length Rupert saw 
the head of a soldier near him, who had incautiously exposed 
himself, drop forward on to the rock. He was shot through 
the brain, and immediately afterwards one of hi. < >mrades, 
who rose to lift him, thinking that he might be only wounded, 
received a bullet in the shoulder. 

So the fight stood for all that live-long day. No more men 
were hit, for after this lesson they dared not show themselves, 
and unless they did so, the enemy did not fire. There they 
lay, cramped up behind their stones and baked in the burning 
sun. Of food they had plenty, but as it happened the water, 
of which there was none here, was scarce, for they had used 
nearly all of it on the previous night, expecting to be able 
to refill their bags at a well a little further along the 
mountains. Although it was husbanded, soon the last drop 
had been drunk, 60 that towards evening they began to suffer 
from thirst. 

At length the sun sank and the darkness came. 



/ 



CHAPTER XIII 



THE END OF THE FIGHT 



Now during all these weary hours Rupert had been taking 
counsel with himself. He was skilled in Arab warfare, and 
guessed that Ibrahim's plan was not to attempt to rush him in 
the daylight, which at best would cost him many more men 
and might mean defeat, but to get among his little band with 
the spear under cover of the night, or perhaps just at the break 
of dawn. Utterly outnumbered as they were, to such a move as 
this there could be but one end — annihilation. It was, how- 
ever, possible that it would not be made; that the Arabjs 
would be content to continue their present tactics, knowing 
that Rupert had no hope of succour, and that soon or late 
thirst must conquer him. Therefore it would seem that he 
was driven to choose between two alternatives — surrender or 
retreat. He gathered Lis men together and addressed them 
through the darkness, not hiding from them how desperate he 
thought their plight. 

Under the circumstances, he said, if they wished to surrender 
he would not forbid them, only then he believed that whatever 
promises were made, they would all be killed, or at the best 
taken away and sold as slaves to the Khalifa, or his emirs, 
with whom, doubtless, Ibrahim was in league. For himself, 
however, he should certainly not sunender, but choosing the 
best place he could find, fight on till he was killed like Gordon. 

With one voice the soldiers said they would not suffer this ; 
their business was to die with their captain, not desert him : 
they were Soudanese and men, not Fellaheen. 

173 



»74 



^hc mtps ot tbc Spirit 



He thanked them simply, and put before them the second 
^temative-that of retreat. The pass behind them was open, 
though none of them had erer travelled it, and a map he 
had showed a water-hole about some thirty miles away in the 
desert beyond, which they might reach. Or failing that, when 
they were clear of the pass they could turn and skirt along the 
mountams, taking their chance of water and of safety. Or 
they could try to cut their way back to Wadi-Halfa, a thing 
however that seemed hopeless, since if they got through, they 
would be overtaken, surrounded and picked off in the open 
desert. '^ 

Having discussed the matter among themselves the men 
announced their decision that flight was best. For the rest 
they said, they resigned themselves to ^l Mektub which means 
"to that which is written^'; or in other words, to Destmy. 
Then Rupert called the roll to see that all were present. Two 
did not answer to their names— the dead man and the sergeant 
Abdullah. At first it was thought that the latter had been 
killed also, ;ill someone remembered that early in the 
afternoon he had gone to tend and feed the camels, since 
when he had not been seen. Afterwards it was discovered 
that, anticipating his commander's plan, he had already 
retreated-with the best camel-an act of cowardice which, it 
will be seen, produced very grave results to Rupert, and indeed 
profoundly influenced his subsequent career. For here it may 
be said at once that Abdullah got back to the Nile in safety 
by skirting round the mountains, and needless to add, made 
his own report to the authorities, which, as it happened, there 
was no one to contradict. 

Now, their counsel taken, the little band set themselves to 
carry it out as best they could without delay, since they knew 
not at what moment the attack might be delivered. First 
they built a fire of whatever material they could collect and 
ht It, so as to suggest to the Arabs that they remained in camp 
there. Also, having said the prayers for the dead over him 



t 



XCbc En^ of tbc f (flbt ,,5 

they set th-ir fallen companion behind a stone, above which nn. 

oHhe t nl ''^ ''r'^' '" ^"^^ * Positiot^i^ttflirh 
left thtd L^^^^^ '•''"• . ^"° °' '''' '^^''^ -"«»^ -J- they 

heStilf th"" '°*"u^ '"'«^' *^^^^^^« ^b« <^"e™y into 
he behef that the caravan had not moved. This done they 

T^lL'^m r'' V''''- °"'^ ^° «"^ *hat their task 
was more difficult even than they thought 

The moon not being up, the darkness in that narrow gorge 

pitted with ho es washed out by water, in one of whicha 
camel soon broke its leg and had to be k lied with a kmflaJ 
eft wuh us valuable load Not half a mile further on a^ot^ 
camel fell over a bank or precipice-they could not tell wTch- 
and vanished, while a man twisted his ankle, and a secorKi 
mimbhng struck his forehead against a stone and cutlj 

stce^o p ^ce^^ ''"'^'" ""'''''' '^ '^'^ ''" ^^^ -on" i 
smce to proceed was practically impossible. At length the 

moon came, but the sky was cloudy, also she was on the wane 

gulf StiUth T'l7 '" ""'^ ^«"" off m that dep' 
coLrf oLrr^^^^^ r''"^"« ^ordayUghr, and taking 
comfort from the thought that if the Arabs followed meters 
would be equally bad for them. ' 

The sky turned gray, the dawn broke, and then with the 
starthng suddenness that will be famiha to aJ Travel t 

forward. For a m.le or so al! went *ell till they came to a 
pl-oe whe.e the pass opened out, and .t. sides! no loir 
Zrr:' "^;i^'^^^'^<^ -*h scrub and boulders T 'en 

hot A r *f °"' ""' ^*"" ^^-'^^r« -n« out a r fle 
hot. A few yard* .h^, in the centre of the vlll.y, IT. 

httle hiU or kopK »lm b.,ulder-strewn, and understanding at 

^rerrtrcTo'^e^r tsrto'T' r ^^"^ "^-^ 

.houted to his band to m^aLeT th k^p^T^^fr 






»76 



Ubc Ma)? ot tbe Spirit 



They did so under a fierce fire, but as the Arab shooting 
was bad and the mist still hung at the bottom of the valley, 
without much loss. On the kopje were two or three of the 
enemy's marksmen vhom they dislodged and killed. Then 
taking the best positions they could find, the little company 
prepared itself to inflict all the damage it could upon its foes 
before it met its inevitable doom. Although a man fell now 
and again this was delayed for several hours, until at length 
the rest of the 4rabs, who had followed them down the pass, 
arrived. 

Then came the last bitter struggle. Spch things sound 
heroic to tell of — the forlorn stands of the few against the many 
always do — but in practice they are only dreadful ; the glory 
is naught but a residuum deposited in the cauldrons of their 
sanguinary and seething horror by the powerful precipitants of 
distance, romance, and time. 

Thus this last desperate fight of a few wearied men against 
many may be noble to read of, but in fact it was merely 
hideous. Brave things were done by these black Soudanese, 
who, if they are well led and trust their leader, will not 
siurender with a loss of about five per cent, in killed and 
wounded; indeed surrender was talked of no more. But 
though it was emphasised thereby, who could think of 
gallantry when a man shot through the bowels lay writhing on 
the ground beside him, cursing and praying by turns, but still 
loading his gun, and, in the pauses of his paroxysms, bringing 
other men to their death. When the tongue is hanging from 
the jaws with thirst, when the brows throb with fatigue and 
pain, and the heart is well-nigh bursting with rage, grief for 
those who will be seen no more, and apprehensions of the 
dreadful end, who can think of the cup and chaplets of fame, 
and the empty trappings of honour ? 

At least Rupert could not. He fought on grimly ; he did 
his best Two rushes he repelled, for now that their fire 
slackened, the Arabs were trying to make an end of them with 






TTbc Bn^ of the figbt 



sleen nn oo k" ^'' °'' ^^ether she would still 

Sleep on as his spirit oassed tj,o„ i, . """*" »"» 

and shook a dying com^y fh, I'd *°' '" "* """'==' 

^a^:o^rz:^:s-^--: 

Not yet," he answered : '« but wa,> t ^ 
Ah ! that got him fair." '' ^ '°'"* P'«^«°«y- 

"No don't come," answered the man "live nn v 
may. He who lives long sees mnrh \ '^ ^°" 

things vengeance on hrene^s "L " „ """T' °''" 
-jHe shei. XhraHim hanging t;^^.:' ^ -^1^ 

Jj^en the soldier grunted, rolled on to his face, and was 
Puffs of smoke spurted from behind rocks • snelr* cK« * • 

.he u ,r „f'.'he :ro™:x™orBiLr "^ t 

btack „r«ms, and was LkJ 1 by 1 if^ff T V *'"' 

^i^en^rr.;^;rdi£S-"--- 

/ iiave aone irom the begmnmg, and will do 

M 



178 



TIbe Mat of tbe Spirit 



till the end. Untouched by some miracle, Rupert still fought 
on. His rifle was empty; a tali, bearded Arab had fallen 
before its last shot. Then quite close to him he saw Ibrahim, 
and remembering his revolver, drew it, when suddenly a heavy 
blow from behind felled him to the ground. 

Rupert came to himself again, and by degrees understood 
dimly that he was nut dead, since he lay where he had fallen, 
and all about him were slain and wounded men. Near by, 
also, stood two of his own people, captives, with their hands 
tied behind them. The sheik Ibrahim was questioning them, 
promising them life if they would tell him where they had 
hidden away the gipsy Balchita and her companion, the lady 
Mea. They answered that they accepted his terms, and 
would do so with pleasure. They were hidden in the desert, 
whither they had departed before the beginning of the fight, 
so if he wanted them he had best go look for them there. 

This answer seemed to infuriate the sheik, who called to 
some of his people to kill " these dogs." They came, whereon 
the two men, putting down their heads, butted at them like 
rams, ar J 'nocking one of them down, jumped and trampled 
on hi:; fuce until the cruel swords did their work with them 
and they died there. Then the wounded were killed also, so 
that presently, of all his company, Rupert alone was left alive. 

Now they caught hold of him and asked him questions about 
the women, but he pretended not to be able to speak because 
of thirst, pointing to his throat and mouth. The artifice suc- 
ceeded, for they brought him water, of which he stood in 
terrible need. The bowl was large, but he emptied all of it, 
and felt his life come back to him. Now Ibrahim addressed 
him. 

" Dog of an unbeliever," he said, " you see that your 
cunning and courage have not availed against the decrees 
of Allah who has destroyed all your band ! " 

" It is so," answered Rupert ; " but he seems to have 
destroyed many of yours also. Here I count over twenty 



of 



TTbc Bnb of tbe fight 



179 



takes 



" Th« u me— Where are the women ? " 

io:nS,"'i',,:° 1^' f;P'^ - ''-ghtered; I LuW 
and prepare ,ou 1 pire" '' """' °' '™ •"" '°« "«<'». 

"Not yet, nor so swiftly," he said " Rm^ K- 
h;m on a camel. He shai see uT catch tet "^ ^' 
after that we will }udi?e him .. a ^'* '^°'"«°' Md 

c -'**°Se nim according to the law » 

about fort, of, ier'rh'rlr °T^ "'■"' "■• Arabs- 
or bad be'en ^^u, I' ve^ ^^er H ^ ""™"''«^ 
including the tbousand JZnds fa "„ h k i """ '^'^• 
Welk At the moiHh m^^ "^ ' '""''' " ">« Sweet 

.beysea^he^^d r.oletft^.'otrf' '"""" ""' 
camels ridden by Bakhita. m7. a . *° 'P°°' "f "« 

tba, it led out TntTVhl H.^^' k '^"' "™"' ""d seeing 
.bat da, .b". '.htrl^r : '°"°"'' """'• A" 
marked upon the n,ap, J^d he,rb^nl v "''^' '"" '" 
desperate figh, and long travd^ 1 TT'' """ """ 
further, although their sh\ " ?th™ td„ '°"'V° "° 
camped there by the water ,„/!? 7 '°' ^o the, 

»«. or Which Jer.';r;;t;^;, "-« "" -kes o, «our. 

.bI^r:;a"5.rLrwer?J:-'<' — one of 

■ we,e ^^^.^i in ine scrub near 






i8e 



TCbe TPdUy ot tbe Sofrft 



the water— crept out and begged for food. It was given to 
them, and when they had filled themselves, Ibrahim asked 
them if two women and a man mounted on camek bad passed 
that way. 

They answered, yes, about thirty hours before. By this 
time they must be far ^way as, after only a short rest to water 
their camels and to e:)t, they had departed vtry swiftly. 

Now Ibrahim uriderstood that his prey had escaped him. 
Indeed, the Arabs refused to follow them any further into the 
desert, where they feared they might be trapped by Mea's 
people, and die like their brethren in the pass. His rage 
knew no bounds, since he was well aware the booty that he 
had taken could not in the least compensate for the death of 
so many of his best men; whose loss in a private quarrel, 
moreover, would be bitterly resented by the tribe, and 
especially by the women. He was sure, also, that as Rupert 
had said, the Government would avenge this great murder by 
sending an expedition against him, which could only be 
avoided by his escaping with the remainder of his people to 
join the Khalifa. 

Lastly, all had been done in vain, since the woman, Mea, 
whom he desired with the fierce intensity which is character- 
istic of the inhabitants of the Soudan, had got away safely to 
her own land of Tama which was far too strong for him to 
attack. All these ills and others had been brought upon him, 
he reflected, by his old enemy, the English Bey, who had 
protected Mea, and with his small band fought so stubbornly 
in the pass that he had been unable to pursue and capture 
her. Hate of this dogged infidel boiled up in Ibrahim's 
black and cruel heart, till with a flash of joy he remembered 
that at least he could make him pay for these misfortunes. 

Suddenly he gave orders that the prisoner should be led 
before him. Accordingly he was brought to where Ibrahim 
sat near the cooking fire under the shadow of an ancient and 
wide-spreading thorn. 



tbc £n5 of tbc ftQbt 



ttt 

"What ig your pleasure with me, Sheik?" asked Rupert 
calmly. "Is the appointed hour at hand? If so, be si^ft. 
for I am tired and wish to sleep." 

"Not yet, dog." answered Ibrahim; "and perhaps not at 
all. for I remember the saying : ' He is merciful *ho forgives. 
Though an mfidel, you are a brave man." 

"I do not ask your forgiveness ; it is you who should ask 
mme, who have again broken faith with your master the 
Khedive and murdered my people without cause," answered 
Kupert proudly. 

" Nor do I offer it," said Ibrahim ; " but Allah offers, and I 
am h.s servant. Once-do you remember ?_I promised 
you that a day would come when I should command you 
to make choice between death and Islam. It is here 
Choose now. Accept the faith publicly, which should not* 
be hard to you, seeing that already you wear the garb and 
travel under the holy name of the Prophet; write it in a letter 

Tf tCf wT "I ^u '" *''* y°" '^"°""^« '^'^ «"d are one 
of the faithful, and that you blame me not, and go free. Or 
refuse and die an infidel. I have said." 

Rupert laughed in his face. 

"Have done with such idle talk," he answered. « Am I a 
child or a woman that I should be frightened by death which 
1 have faced a score of times since yesterday? Traitor 
Ib^hmij you can bind my body, but not my spirit. I have 

en!! ^%T^u- """"^ "'"^ '"■"• ^'^•^'"^ '*^*- B"t it did not 
come. Ibrahim turned aside and consulted with some of his 
people. Then with a cruel smile he said • 

J' ^ 7^u^°^ ^. ?'°''°^'^- ^ '^^ ^^'" ^'»°'' "^ercy and give 
your stubborn spmt time for repentance, that it may not fo e 
the joys of Paradise. Throw him down " 
They obeyed, and as he lay on his back staring through the 

mm, whom he had heard speaking of himself as a butcher by 



i8a 



TCbe TPUai? of tbe Spirit 



trade, drtw hit iword, while another heated the broad blade of 
a spear in the fire. Then for the first time he felt afraid. 
Death he did not fear— but mutilation ! 



Fourteen hours had gone by and Rupert was still living. 
Yes, although they had hacked off his right foot, and in the 
morning when again he refused to accept the Koran, burnt 
out his left eye and scored his cheek with a hot iron, being 
strong, be still lived. Now he was seated on the saddle of 
a dromedary beneath the thorn tree, a noose about his neck, 
the rope to which it was attached being thrown over a bough 
of the tree. They were about to hang him, but first, again in 
the name of mercy, gave him a little while to change his mind 
and accept the faith. 

The agonies of his body and his soul were very great, but 
Rupert still sat there proudly, the ruin of a man, uttering no 
complaint, making no plea for pity. Only in his heart he 
wondered humbly what he had done that these terrors should 
come upon him. Then he remembered that in this blood- 
stained Soudan, the home of fanaticism and devilry, many a 
man as good or better than himself— yes, and many a woman 
also, had been called upon to suffer even worse things, and 
bowed his mangled head in submission to the decree of 
Destiny. Never once during those long hours of torment 
had he dreamed of purchasing its remission, as by a word 
he could have done. For this he took no credit to himself, 
whose faith and pride were both too deeply rooted to permit 
him even to entertain the thought. 

This world was ended for him ; none would ever know even 
the hideous fashion of his farewell to the sun. Now he had 
but one desire left— to show no sign of pain or fear to his 
tormentors, and brave and loyal to the last, to enter on the 
next. Even those heartless fiends marvelled at his courage, 
and grew half ashamed of their red work. They wished to let 



Tn?c £nD of tbe ffdbt 



183 



him go, but Ibrahi'^i said nay, it was too late, he must die for 
their safety's sake. Indeed, even had Rupert been weak and 
entered Islam, i*^ was still hia intention that he should die. 
Only the Arab wished to break his spirit first as he had 
broken his body. 

They had left him alone a while, knowing that he could not 
stir, and were saddling their beasts. Now they came back, all 
of them, and stood in front of him, watching him with curious 
eyes. God t>e thanked! the end was at hand, and soon he 
would feel no more of those racking pains. There they stood, 
grave and silent, pitying him in their hearts, all except Ibrahim, 
who chose this moment to expound to his victim the principal 
doctrines of the Koran, and to assure him that he must 
certainly go to hell. 

Rupert made no answer, only looked over the heads of his 
tormenters, with the eye that was left to him, at the little slope 
of land opposite, of which the crest ran not more than a 
hundred yards away. Was he mad, or was he altogether 
blind, and did he perhaps see visions in his blindness ? If 
not, coming over the brow of that hill were horsemen, armed 
with spears, and amongst them a woman, who also held in her 
hand a spear. They looked, they halted, they spread out, but 
the murderers, intent upon the face of the dying man, never 
heard the sound of them on that soft sand and against the 
strong desert wind. 

"It is without avail," Ibrahim said. "The infidel dog 
rejects the cup of mercy; let him die the death of a dog," 
and he seized the rope. 

"One moment," broke in Rupert, in a thick voice, 
" that last point of yours, Sheik, touches my reason ; 
light breaks upon me from on high. Repeat it, I pray 
you." 

Ibrahim smiled cruelly. He had triumphed, the gallant 
English chief turned coward at the last. Then he began t9 
repeat his argument. 






MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 



1.0 ^*^ 1^ 




us 



135 

14.0 



2.2 
1.8 





^ APPLIED IM^GE Inc 

^^' 1653 East Main Street 

r-S Rochester. New York 1*609 USA 

iSa (716) 482 - 0300- Phone 

^a (716) 288 - 5989 - Fax 



184 



Ubc mas of tbe Spirit 



I 

: 



The horsemen came on in a semi-circle, a hundred of them 
at least, or Rupert dreamed that they did. No, by Heaven ! 
it was no dream, for hark now to that shrilling battle-cry of 
" Tama, Tama I ".and hark to the thunder of the hoofs as the 
spurred horses sprang forward wildly and galloped down upon 
them. The Arabs wheeled round and saw their doom. With 
mad shouts of terror they fled this way and that, rushing 
towards the camels. As he went, Ibrahim hurled a spear at 
Rupert, but again it only grazed his head. 

Then came the swift and sudden vengeance. Some were 
cut down and some were captured, Ibrahim among them. In 
two miiiutes it was over. A horse was dragged to its haunches 
almost in front of him, and from its back leapt a woman— Mea. 
She cast down her spear, she ran to him and threw her arms 
about him; she kissed him on the brow, and seeing what were 
the nature of his hurts, wept and cursed in English and in 
Arabic. Then, those soft eyes of hers flashing terribly, she 
turned and screamed an order : 
" Bring them hither, every one of them that lives." 
They haled them up. a score of them or more ; yes, even 
the dying; blood-stained, with rent garments and head-dresses 
gone, they dragged them before her. 

" Now," she said, in a voice of icy fury, " do unto them as 
they have done to t^e English lord, only from Ibrahim cut 
off both hands and both feet before you hang him to the 
tree." 

The miserable men flung themselves upon the ground, 
pleadmg for mercy. Yes, even Ibrahim prostrated himself at 
her feet and prayed to be slain at once. As well might he 
have prayed to a stone idol of slaughter. Indeed, drawn up 
to her full height, every nerve in her quivering, her soft and 
lovely face alive with rage and horror, she looked more like 
a goddess of vengeance than a woman. 

"Spare them, lady," said Rupert hoarsely; "they are but 
fanatic barbarians. Spare them for my sake." 



TLbc En& of tbc rtflbt 185 

She turned on him. 

" Be silent, Bey," she answered roughly. " Shall I not do 
vengeance for your sake who were made thus for me ? » 

Then at length he swooned away, and when an hour later he 
came to himself again to find his head lying on Mea's lap 
while Bakhita doctored his hurts with cloths and ointments.' 
he saw that the awful decree had been executed, for there 
upon the thorns those murdering Arabs hur g, everv one of 
them. 



k 






CHAPTER XIV 

MEA MAKES A PROPOSAL 

That sight of the corpses of his tormentors hanging to the 
thorn trees was the last that Rupert was destined to see for 
many a day. Indeed for weeks, so far as any subsequent 
memory was concerned, he remained quite unconscious. 
Unconscious they bore him in a litter across the desert to 
the Black Pass of the further mountains where no white man 
had set foot, and on through the heart of them to the hidden 
oasis around which they stood like sentinels. Here placed by 
the waters, beneath the shade of palms and near to the tower- 
ing pylons of the ruined temple, stood the town, Tama, over 
which by right of descent the lady Mea held her rule. It 
was not a large town, for the tribe was small, not number- 
ing more than four hundred men who could bear arms for, 
proud of their ancient blood and hating strangers, they would 
intermarry with no other folk, and therefore the old race 
dwindled. But the land was very rich, and the houses were 
well built and stored, since being so few in number there was 
little poverty among the children of Tama. 

Mea brought Rupert to her own home, which was large, 
comfortable and built of stone taken from the ruined temple ; 
surrounded also by gardens. Here she and Bakhita nursed 
him as a man has seldom been nursed before. There were 
doctors in the tribe who, as is sometimes the case among 
African natives, had a certain rude knowledge of surgery. 

These men drew the seared flesh over his severed bone 
so that in this pure air, and kept clean with astringent 

i86 



Aea maftes a proposal 



187 



ointment, it healed without mortifying or other complications. 
They doctored his head also, but in such matters their skill 
was little, nor could anything they were able to do prevent 
the inflammation from spreading to the other eye. This 
passed in time, but its sight was affected so much that 
when at length Rupert woke up from his wanderings, he 
thought that it must be night-time, for dense darkness hung 
before him like a veil. 

For a long while he could not remember or guess vhere he 
was, but by degrees recollection returned, only he thought it 
must be that left by a nightmare. 

It was Mea's voice which in the end opened the closed 
doors of his understanding. She had seen the change in 
Rupert's face and trembled with hope, believing that at last 
his reason had come back to him. For a while she watched 
him as he groped about aimlessly with his hands until she 
learnt that as they had feared, he was blind. At length, able 
to bear the suspense no more, she spoke to him in her quaint 
English. 

"You sleep very long, Rupert Bey. Now you awake, 
yes?" 

He turned his head, listening intently, then said : 

"Is that not Mea'. voice, the lady Mea who poured a 
libation to the gods at Abu-Simbel ? " 

" Yes, yes," she answered eagerly, " of course. No one else 
have voice like Mea. All of them stupid and can't talk 
English. But," she went on, again watching him, for she 
wished to know how much he remembered, "I pour that cup 
over your feet, not over the god, and Bakhita say that why 
everything go upside down, and you lose your poor foot." 

Her voice trembled as she spoke the words, and it was only 
with an effort that she could add : 

" But I think Bakhita silly old woman who talk confounded 
nonsense. Gods only old stones, and which way cup tumbled 
nothing to do with luck." 



1 88 



tlbe Mas or tbe Spirit 



rdoi'^H l^T *"? *^''^ ^"P*"^ ^"«^^' »"d oh ! how she 
Ind he sll^i '"• ^'^"^ ''^ P°"^ ^'''^^^^ f-« g'- «^-« 

h/^^"^'"^^''^' ^" *^°"* "^y ^°°t «"d eyes, and what 
happened. Don't be afraid, I can bear it now;" 

So she took his hand and tola him everything, speaking in 

her nch and . ,e Arabic, for the resources of the English 

language, as she . new it, were not equal to that tale. Yet in 

tJTTu "'^' '^°''*- ^^'^^'^^ ^"^ '^' ^"d their attendant 
Ravelled the pass of Jebal Marru in safety, and journeyed on 
at great speed, for their camels were as good L any in the 

had said. When they drew near the Black Gate, as the euUy 

Zt^^1:^'TTi''^J-''''^''^' ''^ oasis.'to their' ; 
toey met a hundred of their own men who, summoned by the 

se^kThfm. '''' '*' ""^^ '°^''^^^' ^^'^ ---« -t to 
At once they returned upon their tracks. Bakhita and the 

refused to do. Indeed she asserted her authority and took 
command pushmg back, almost without rest as fast as 1^'e 

the'vld 'T'' '"V'"^ ""^^^ '■" ^-- It seemed thr^ 
they had seen the smoke of the cooking fire, and it was tWs 

lo Wrt^rr m ''' '^^"^ ^° ^^^« ' She d^riSTd 
to Rupert what she felt when she perceived him sitting mutilated 
upon the camel furniture with the noose about his throat 

A flame burnt up within me, the air turned red, the sand 
o^^the desert smelt of blood, and I swore to avenge you or 

escan^''' ^ u"'"'' ^''' ' ^'^ ^^^"^^^ ^ot one of them 
escaped, and wth my own hand I drove my spear throu^rh 
he heart of that dog. Ibrahim. Yes. I Jt him his eye' 
hat he might see the stroke. Oh. they never wrung a wo'd 
from you he confessed it; but Ae cried to me for mfrcyTnd 
tllZl^'-'-'' H-^edtomeformercy.andTg::^ 






Aea malted a proposal 






189 

Rupert shook her hand loose from his. 
"You did wrong," he answered; "you should have shown 
mercy. It is written : ' Love your enemies ' j but I forget, you 
have never learned." 

"I have learned," she answered; "but how could I 
pardon him who would have forced me, Tama-(she pro- 
nounced It Timi as though the word were spelt with two 
r-s)— me, born of the ancient blood, into his vile harem? 
Nay, that perhaps I might have forgiven, but when I saw 
you, Rupert Bey, with that rope about your neck, blinded 
and with your toot struck off, all for me-all for me, a 
stranger to you, not of your family, not of your house-oh! 
then I could not forgive. Nay, I wished that he had a hundred 
lives that I might take them all, and-be not angry with me- 
I wish It still. I am not unkind. Ask my people here if I 
have ever slain, or even beaten one of them without a cause, 
but that sight, It made me like a leopard whose cubs have been 
killed before her eyes. Think not the worse of me. I will 
repent, I will learn better, but oh ! I am glad that I drove the 
spear through the heart of Ibrahim and watched him die. 
And Bakhita is worse than I am, remember that, she wished 
to kill him slowly." 

" What is done, is done," answered Rupert " This desert 
is a cruel place, and God forgive us all for many things." 

Then he paused, nor did he resist her when timidly she took 
his hand again, he who guessed that she had sinned for him. 

" Tell me, Mea," he said, " shall I always be blind as well as 
maimed ? " 

" I do not know," she answered, with a sob. " Our doctors 
do not know. I pray not. Oh, I wish that Ibrahim were 
a'jve again that he might go blind for all his days. Nay, 
pardon me, pardon, but that deed of his was evil, because you 
would not worship his accursed prophet, or so he said, who 
hated you for other reasons. Now rest you. Bey, rest you; 
you must not talk so much. I will sit at your side and keep 



190 



TTbe Mai? ot the Sptrit 



the flies from off your face. Rest, and I will sing you to 
sleep," and she began to croon over him some ancient song 
that may have come down from the days of the Pharaohs, as 
a mother croons above a fevered babe. 



This was the beginning of Rupert's life at Tama. By 
degrees his strength came back to him, but for three months 
he remained stone-blind, and during all that time Mea's hand 
was seldom out of his. With the help of a liitle dog that he 
held by a string, she led him to and fro ; she nursed and 
doctored him ; she watched his sleep. He remonstrated, he 
grew angry even, and then for a while old Bakhita came, and 
he was left with her and the little dog, but next morning it was 
always Mea's soft hand*that he felt in his, and not Bakhita's 
bony fingers. For a long while he thought little of all this. 
Even in health and strength, Rupert was the least vain of 
men, but broken, mutilated, scarred, blinded as he was, a 
horror such as those that sit the streets of Cairo to beg for 
alms, it never even ocrurred to him that a woman, lovely, and 
in her own world high-placed as he knew Mea to be, would 
think of him as more than a friend to whom she was grateful 
for service rendered. Yet at last he did begin to have 
misgivings. He could not see her, but there was a note in her 
voice when she spoke to him, there was something in her touch 
when she took his hand, a kind of caress, which alarmed him. 
He took occasion to talk to her about his wife in England, 
and even gave her to look at the miniature of Edith, painted 
upon ivory which he had in a gold locket. She studied it 
carefully, said that the laJy was pretty, but cold as the houi 
before a winter dawn, and then asked if she were really his 
wife, or only called so, and she used a phrase that can best be 
translated by the words, " for political reascjs." 

" Of course," answered Rupert. " Why do you ask such a 
question ? " 



Aea matted a proposal 



191 

in p^'^rcv '^"^ " ''°"'" ^''*' "'^y " »»'« >n England, not 
n Egypt ? She „ not ill and she has no children to tend, is it 

pJ^hP'r Tu ^°'"''^ '° *"'"'" '^^' '" ^^' ^» he was aware. 
Ediths health was good, and of course there were no children. 
Wder to explain her absence, he added that she did not like 

"Ah!" replied Mea enigmatically, and in English, "in cold 

country, cold wife; in warm country, kind wife ; //ia/ all right." 

Then finding further explanation difficult, Rupert called the 

ittle dog asked her to take him for a walk, and was tenderly 

led round the garden. 

As soon as his general health was a little reestablished, as 

addressed to the Government in Cairo, and giving an account 
of the miserable end of his mission. This letter was sent 
off by a messenger to Wady-Halfa, together with another to 
Edith, also written by Mea. When in after days he saw the 
postscript which she added, but had not thought necessary to 
read to him, he was somewhat astonished. It ran • "To the 
white wife of Rupert Bey from M«»a, lady of Tama 

wZ ^° °°;/'°"^J^ f^"- y°">" •°'-d ; I look after him well, and love 
him with all my heart. Why not ? He massacred for me 1 

llZZTl rr^?'" ''" ""'''' ^" ^"g^^''^' y°" head. 
In Soudan. I head That good plan ; no trouble at all. I give 
greetings, and make bow.-Your sistc •, « Mea '' 

As ithappened, these epistles never reached their destinations 
since within a week the messenger returned saying that the 
whole country on the other side of the Jebal Marru was in a 

iTn!!' A """""f '^"' '^^^"""''' ^"P^«'^ ««rg«ant. had 
escaped safely and reported that Rupert and all his people 
were killed. Thereon the Government had sent an expedition 
against the remnant of the tribe of Ibrahim, sheik of the Sweet 

. K ' J. rf P*°?^ ^'"^ ''*''"*^ °f *heir fate, had appealed 
to the Khahfa, with the result that several thousand of his 



' >} 



I9S 



TCbe XXHa^ of tbe Spirit 



adherents, under a powerful emir, were despatched to ....i. 
assistance, though whether from the neighbourhood of Su^. m 
or from the north, Rupert could not discover. At any rate, 
they were too many to be attacked by the little Govrmment 
expedition, and for the while remained in possession of the 
territory between the Jebal Marru and the Nile. 

At first Rupert was inclined to believe that Mea had 
concocted this story for her own purposes, but Bakhita assured 
him that it was not so. She said, moreover, that the Black 
Pass by which alone the oasis could be apnroached was watched 
day and night to guard against sudden attack by those who 
wished to avenge the death of Ibrahim, and every possible 
preparation made to fight to the last. No attack came, how- 
ever, for the oasis was l9oked upon as a haunted place among 
the neighbouring tribes, who feared Its inhantants also as 
infidel wizards favoured by the devil. Their treatment of the 
band of Ibrahim who had been found hanging to the trees, 
and especially of that unlucky skeik himself, had not, it seemed, 
lessened this impression. 

Subsequently the letters we.e again despatched in the charge 
of two messengers. In due course one of these brought tnv i 
back for t^'e second time. He had fallen in with an outpost 
of the Mahdists and barely escaped with bis life, his companion 
being overtaken and speared. 

After this Rupert abandoned his attempts to communicate 
with civilisation. Plunged as he was in utter darkness of raind 
and b Nly, his days were sad enough. He had failed in his 
mission, r nd the very chiefs whom he hoped to win over were, 
he learned, now firm adherents of the Khalifa. His career 
was at an end, for he had lost his leg and his sight, 
and worst of all, his wife must believe that he was dead. 
It tore his heart to think of her and bis mother's distress and 
agony ; but what could he do except bow his head in patience 
before the Power that had decreed these things, and pray that 
some of the burden might be lifted from his back? 



/l>ea mahc0 a propo0al ,93 

enough had brought all this trouole upon him. had saved his 
life by ner sweet care, as by her swift decision and fierce 
courage she savec h,n= from the noose. Rupert believed that 

whr!n .k" ''*'T '° ^'' '•'"• ^°'" "^ ^''"^^ '" »he beginning, 
when all the we.ght of his terrible mi.fortunos pressed upon 
his bram and crushed hi,n, it seemed like to fail. Then Vhe 
who watched him always would see and understand. And, 
since the customs of the E.st are always the same, as "when 
he evil spint from God was upon Saul, David took an harp and 
played with his hand ; so Saul was refreshed and was well, and 
the evil spirit departed from him," so did Mea take her harp 
and piuy before Rupert and sing over him in that full, sweet 
voice of hers, the old, old songs of Egypt, some of which she 
no longer understood, till at length for a little while he forgot 
his sorrows and was refreshed. Moreover, there came to him 
one happiness, his sight returned. 

He was lying on an angarib. or native bedstead, during the 
•^eat of the afternoon in the large, cool room that had been 
given to him, smce if he sal up for long his mutilated leg still 
prn,,d h.m, whilst o.er against him, Mea sat upon a stool. 
She had been playing to him, singing as she played ; but now 
her harp-hke instrument lay at her side and she watched him 
.:: silence, her chin resting upon her hand. He knew that she 
was looking at hm, for he cculd feel her ga.e, and was 
amusing himself by trying to recollect the exact fas^iion of her 
beauty, which he had really seen but thricc-in the ten^ple at 
Abu-Simbel ; when she ba/.e farewdl to him in the p.is;? ; and 
lastly, when she appeared again at the head of her zhita'AS 
regiment and d .reed the d-om of Ibrahim and his brigands 
This last time did not count, however, for then she was 
quite changed, a valk/rie, an animated Vengeance, not a 
woman. Now he amused himself by attempting to reconcile 
these two countenan.es that both were hers, and in wondering 
what sort of face she wore to-day. Useless as it was, from old 



-wwn 



194 Ube Mas of tbe Spirit 

habit, he looked towards her through the pitchy, maddening 
darkness that hemmed him in like a wall. 

He looked, and lo ! he saw. On that darkness there 
appeared something soft and cloudy, and he knew that it was a 
woman's outspread hair. Then within the frame of hair arose 
a ghost-like face, and in it shining eyes, from which tears ran 
down, and on it such a look of utter tenderness as he never, 
never had beheld. Oh 1 it was beantiful, that face ; always it 
would have been beautiful, but to this man who, after those 
weeks of utter blindness, beheld it first of anything, it was like 
a vision out of heaven. And the look upon it 1 Surely that, 
too, had been borrowed from some pitying angel in heaven. 
Rupert turned his head, then looked again, thinking that it 
would be gone ; but no, it still was there, and now he could 
even see the hand beneath the chin and the quivering of the 
lips which strove to stifle back a sob. 

•• Mea," he said, in English, • why do you cry ? " 

She sprang up, dashing the tears from her eyes with the 
back of her hand. 

" I no cry," she answered, in a merry voice. " Bey, you 

not hear me cry." 

" No, Mea j but I saw you. Youi "heek was all wet, and 
you sat with your chin upon yo'»r harvi." 

She uttered some Arabic exclamation of joy, then snatched the 
linen veil or wimple from her head and threw it over his face. 

•' Look no more," she said, "not good for your eye to look 
too much or you go blind again. Also," she added, with a 
happy laugh, " great shame of you to spy upon a lady when 
she no think you see. You should tell her first you going 
look, then she put on proper face." 

'' I don't want to see any other," answered Rupert gently. 
" At first I thought that I dreamt, and that it was an angel, 
only angels don't cry." 

•« I think that angels ory always if they see down here— such 
a lot to cry over, Rupert Bey." 



/Dea malted a |>ropo0al 195 

Th«n she tried to control herself for a moment, and failed 
miserably, for she began to weep and sob outright. She 
thrsw herself upon her knees beside him and aid : 

"You ask me why I cry, I {s^h) tel! you {sob) all the truth. 
Because you made like that fo. .nc, and— I no can bear it, it 
break my heart, for my heart love you very much, you want to 
die for me ; I— I want to live for you." 

fiupert sat up on the , ,'arib, throwing the white veil from 
his head, whereon, at once forgetting herself in the danger ' ,• 
his new-born sight, she placed her little hand across his eyes, 
and held it there. The crisis had come, and he knew it ; but 
how to deal w it, he did not know. 

'• Don't do that, dear Mea," he said, in a troubled voice. 
" If you think the light will harm me, tie the veil over my 
eyes. Then we will talk." 

She came behind him an ' obeyed, while Rupert felt her 
hot tears falling on his ha' It was an awful moment, but 
he sat still, holding the be_otead with his hand and uttering 
no tender word of the many that nshed unbidden to his 
lips. 

"Now, Mea," he said, "sit down ; no, n n the angarib— 
there on the stool." 

" I sit," she answered humbly. " Talk on." 

"Mea," he continued, with a desperate effort, "all this won't 
do. You are sorry for me, and it upsets you and makes you 
say things you must not. Mea, I am married." 

He stopped, but she made no answer. He began to wondei 
what she was doing, or if she had gone away and left him, as 
he devoutly hoped. 

Unable to bear it any more he pushed the bandage from his 
forehead. No ; there she sat silent and pained. 

" I am married," he remarked again, not knowing what else 
to say. 

Then she looked up and asked ; " You hate me, Ruoert 
Bey?" ^ 



T96 



JSbt m&^ of tbe Spirit 



" Of course not," he answered indignantly ; "very much the 
reverse." * 

" I thank you. Then you think me not nice, ugly ? " 

•• Indeed, no. Ycu are one of the most beautiful women I 
ever saw." 

" I thank you," she said again. " I like hear you say that 
though you no mean it. Then you angry with me because 
you lose your foot and eye and get your people killed, though 
that old Bakhita's fault, not mine." 

" Please don't think so, Mea. It was not you or Bakhita, it 
was what you call Kismet." 

"Yes, I think it Kismet too. Kismet all round, Kismet 
here," and she laid her hand upon her bosom. " Well, then, 
you not hate, you not think ugly, you not angry, and I— oh ! 
I /ove," and she put such<tender passion into the word that the 
room seemed full of it — "and I great lady too in my own place, I, 
Tama, not dirt-born. Why you no take me ? See now I " and 
she stood up before him and turned slowly round, "I not 
beautiful as you say, too small, too thin, but I not so bad ! 
I make you good wife, I give you children, I love you always 
till I die. My people hate strangers, still they very glad you 
take me, they love you too, they praise you much, they think 
you bravest man in world ; my emirs ask me this morning if I 
married to you yet as they want make feast" 

Rupert pulled down the bandage over his eyes again; he 
thought it best, muttering something about the light hurting 
him. 

" Mea," he si id, in despair, " don't you understand that I 
am already marr. ed ? " 

"What that matter?" she asked. "Man can have two 
wives, four if he like." 

" He can't," answered Rupert. " I beg you— don't go on. 
It is not right ; it is more than I can bear. By our English 
law, he can only have one wife, no one else— no one at all. 
You must have heard it." 



Aea maftes a propodal 



197 

•'Oh, yes, I hear, there at Luxor, but I think that all silly 
missionary talk. White people do many things they say they 
should not do-I see them and make note. Who know how 
many wives you have? But if you no want me. mafee-h-l 
done with. I not trouble you any more; I go 'and die. that 

"Unless you stop soon, you will make me go and die » he 
saidfaintly. " Mea, it is cruel of you to talk like that. Listen 
now. and do not be angry, do not think that I am treating you 
111. Oh, my dearest friend, sit there and listen I" 

A^^l f '"^"P ^"^"'^' '" ^^^^'^ '"^^ ^°"ld have found it 
difficult to understand his argument, he addressed her in 

ttt wirr?K V"'. ^'''^''' ^°^'""^« ^"d showing her 

1 crile hV^"f i "^'^^ '"' P'°P^^' •" *^^ W«^^ ^^ 'held 
a cnme; that he had passed his word, and it could not be 

broken, that he would rather die than break it. that hiJ 

honour was on it, and that if he violated his honour, his sou 

would be as scarred and mutilated as his body was thit day. 

Mea listened mtently. and at last began to understand. 

Now are you angry .dth me ? " he ended. " And do you 

still wish me to stay here when I tell you that if I do there 

end, rnight bring me to ruin? If that is too much to ask, 
then to-morrow I go hence into the desert to-" and he 
stopped. ^ "** 

"Nay," she replied, in Arabic, «I am not angry with you. 
Rupert Bey. I am angry with myself who tem^d you to 
break your own law. Oh ! you are good, the best of men that 
I have known, and I will learn to be good like you-only tell 

a?HoM l"""'* ''"'' *° ^"^^y°"' ^°^*h^t I «=annot do; 
and oh ! speak no more of going hence into the desert to die 

IndbToth^r ''"'^"' N^^'bidehereandbemyfrieTd 
and brother since you may not be my husband. Stay and 
forgive me who am ignorant, who have other customs, and 
was not taught thus. Say that you will stay " 



I 

I:: 



198 



TTbc Mas of tbe Spirit 



"Yes," he answered, in a hoarse voice, for he was more 
affected than he dared to show, " I will stay till I can find aa 
opportunity of going home; and oh! Mea, do not suppose 
that I think the worse of you. I honour you, Mea; next to 
my wife and mother, you are the dearest to me of any in the 
world. While I live, I will remain your friend. See, this is 
the token of it;" and leaning forward, he searched for her 
hand and found it, then lifted it to his forehead and touched 
it with his lips. Next instant he heard the rustle of her robes 
as she left the room. 

Thus did Rupert keep the oath that he had sworn to his 
mother years before and come out safely from the fires of a 
very fierce dilemma, and thus did a star arise upon the 
twilight of Mea's soul— at far, cold star, that yet was destined 
to lead her on to wondrous heights, whence the way of the 
flesh seemed very distant, and that of the spirit very near. 



i 



CHAPTER XV 






RUPERT MAKES OBEISANCE 

"For three days after the passionate scene that has been 
described, Rupert saw no more of Mea. When he asked 
about her, not without anxiety, Bakhita, who had taken her 
place as his nurse, informed him that she had gone to a 
distant part of the oasis to inquire about her crops, and to 
settle a dispute between two families as to some land. For 
some reasons he wished that she would come back again, 
since during those days Bakhita was very short with him. ; 
indeed, the word " harsh " would scarcely have exaggerated 
her attitude. 

" I know you are angry with me," he said at last; '« but you 
who are wise and acquainted with our law, will under- 
stand." 

" I understand that you are a fool, Rupert Bey, like many 
of you white men who think yourselves so good and clever. 
I wish you had never come to Tama, for now my niece will 
go unmarried, and the ancient race must die." 

" It is not my fault," he answered humbly, " it is yours, 
Bakhita, who would accompany me somewhat against my will 
and thus have brought ruin upon everybody." 

" Nay," she answered crossly, " it was yours, who spied 
upon us in the sanctuary at Abu-Simbel, and thus caused the 
libation to be poured amiss. From that moment Tama became 
your slave, and the god grew jealous and brought evu upon us 
all, especially upon you, Rupert Bey." 

He laughed a little and said : 

199 



300 



Zbe Mas of tbc Spirit 



.u !^" ^°"'* '■^^"y be"eve all that, do you, Bakhita? Those 
Old gods have been dead for many an age." 

"I am not sure what I believe," she answered; "but 
departed fauhs still haunt the blood of those whose fathers 
held them, and the ancient gods live on in other forms. 
To-day none worship ours, save I, for Mea turned from him 
to you, and the people have forgotten long ago. Well I was 
sure that ill-luck would come, and so it has. Still, I do not 

dir ^7uT' ^'^' ^'° ''' ^^^^^ ^"^ ^°"««t, and have 
dealt^ well by her whom you might have betrayed and left 
Nor. she added, with a curious burst of conviction-" nor am 
I sure that things wilh go so ill after all. You said to us one 
day that the spirit is greater than the flesh, and that those who 
follow the spirit win at last. Though you seem such a fool 
perhaps you are right, Rupert B6y. I think so at times, for 
ook you, I a so have put as-'de the flesh and followed the 
sp nt all my life, and learned much, for do they not call me 
wise and foresighted? Only." she added reflectively 
perhaps I have followed the false spirit, and you follow the 
true. Perhaps the old gods are really dead .t last, and new 
ones ru^ the world. But if so. in the Soudan they ^re dev^s 
Meanwhile. Rupert Bey. deal gently with the flower whose 
stalk you have broken m your clumsy hand, lest the air should 
soon lack its fragrance." 

On the third day Mea reappeared, looking rather pale and 
red-eyed but outwardly, at any rate, in a cheerful mood. Not 
one word did she say then or afterwards to Rupert about their 
great argument as to the moralities of the East and West 
For whether she had been visiting her crops, or perchance 
lying weeping on her bed. at least it would seem that she had 
conquered herself, and was determined to adapt her life to the 
conditions upon which they had tacitly agreed. By now it 
was certain that his sight would be restored to Rupert, and 
this joyful fact worked wonders for them both. For instance 
mounted on a quiet mule, which a servant led. whilst others 



■» ,. > m 



iRttpcrt maftes ^bcteancc 



4 
if 



•01 

™ sTdfl^;""!; "iT"^ '""'• •"" M« herself rode a. 

heriugc: ** ""■ """' ">= ""^^ '"»' "« h" 

It was a large place, thirty miles or more in len«h h„ 

Perhaps fifteen in breadth, which would have supSid a 

P«« population, as once it must have don" ZTta 

f^S^atd"!'""",,*' "'""■"-»-<'^». was of"a maivelto 

arv-rs^an^ast^Tr^h^r^ 
ziTth^rd'^nsi?'-'^ '-' - '"«-- '- " 

«„b^ / .' ^ "**^ inspected most of it " I wonW 

make you the richest woman in the Soudan." ' ^ 

H-hat i. the sun as Jro^a 'dCboro ''Dilt'' t 

mmm 

state in thisTroff "''"^ ^^"^'•at.ons kept a kind of royal 

to Ick tm Tnde'd T^VT'' ^"^'^ ' ^°'^^ ^^'^ 
^ho died as late as Th. f "-^^ophagus of one of them 

after Chris, Z an LT °' ''"'^'^^'"^ ^°"^ ^'^'-^^^ 

deceased s^«I,ovdo^^K•'^^^^^^^^ '""'^'"^ ^^« 
and Lower Egyplr ' ^'"' °' ^*'"" ""^ °^ ^pper 

mauLrrofThri?:;,t ^-^^^^^ -^^ ^^^ 

selves kings pL"m k °^"' ""^^ ^^^ ""^^ 'hem- 

make foXm.! ^ *^"'' '^^^ ^^^^'^ "°t afford to 

for themselves great separate tombs after the fashion 



iil 



H i 

''I i 



203 



Ubc Mai? of tbc Spirit 



of those in the Valley of Kings at Thebes, they hollowed in 
the rock beneath the temple a vast crypt, from which opened 
outside chambers like to those of the Serapeum, the burying- 
place of the sacred bulls of Memphis. At the head of this 
crypt stood a huge and solemn statue of Osiris in his mummy 
wrappings, but wearing the crown and feathers of Amen-Ra 
and at its entrance was a great underground pool or cistern of 
water, across which the bodies of the dead were ferried, in 
imitation, doubtless, of the last journey across the Nile 
Certain of the side-chambers were bricked up, but others were 
either never closed, or had been opened, and there in their 
sarcophagi lay the dead. 

In a past age some of the granite coverings and coffin-lids 
had been removed, but the mummies remained inviolate, 
even their golden ornaments were not disturbed. Those of 
one young queen, or rather chieftainess, who had died a few 
years before the birth of Christ were indeed of remarkable 
beauty and great value, comprising a crown of gold filagree 
and enamelled flowers of marvellous workmanship, inlaid 
pectoral and bracelets and a sceptre of gold surmounted by 
a crystal symbol of the sun. Mea took them from the body 
and arrayec h^reelf in them and stood buore Rupert a queen 
of Eppt, as once he had seen her stand in the sanctuary 
at Abu-Simbel. Very wonderful she looked thus with the 
lamp-light shining upon her in that awesome, silent place 

"What are you doing?" he asked, for notwithstanding the 
bizarre beauty of her decorations, it jarred upon him to see her 
ornamented with these insignia of death. 

"I try them on, Rup-rt Bey,» she answered. "As we 
cannot make such things now I will borrow them from 
the lady, my long-ago grandmother, to be buried in. Come 
here; I show you my tomb." 

Then she led the way past certain built-up chambers in 
which, she informed him, her immediate predecessors lay 
uncoffined, to a recess where was a magnificent sarcophagus 



l^npert nuk^^zs ^beieance 



ao3 

of alabaster. It was graved about with the usual texts 
from the Book of the Dead, but had several peculiarities. 
Thus m Us great interior were places for two bodies with a 
httle ridge of alabaster left to separate them. It was quite 
empty, the massive lid which stood by its side never having 
been put on. Also the spaces for the name, or names, of its 
occupants were left blank, showing that those for whom it was 
prepared rested elsewhere. 

" Where are they ? " asked Rupert, as with the help of Mea 
and his crutch he scrambled down from the pediment of 
the tomb. 

"Don't knoiv," she answered; "perhaps die somewhere 
else 0. killed by enemy; perhaps quarrel, and no wish to 
be buried together. I take their house when my time 
comes; just fit me." 

"Then you mean your husband to lie there too ? " blurted 
■ out Rupert, without thinking. 

Holding the lamp in her hand she turned and looked at him 
with steady eyes. 

"Understand, Rupert Bey," she said, "I have no husba J, 
never-never. All day I work alone, when night come I 
sleep alone. Then my people build up this place— all, all, 
for I the last and nobody ever come in here any more. Yes, 
build it up with stone of the temple and make it solid like 
the mountain, for I wish to sleep long and quiet." 

Such were the oasis Tama and its antiquities. Of its people 
there is little to say, save that they were grave in demeanour, 
rather light in colour and handsome in appearance, especially 
the women, looking much as the last descendants of an ancient 
and high-bred race might be expected to look. The men as 
we have seen, were brave enough in war, suspicious and 
exclusive also, but indolent at home, doing no more work 
than was necessary, and for the most part lacking the energy 
to trade. Their customs as regards marriage and other matters 
were those common to Nubia and the Soudan, but although 



ao4 



trbc mais of tbc Spirit 



Ihey talked of Allah they were not Mahommedans, and if they 
worshipped anything, it was God as symbolised by the sun. 
Indeed this was all that remained of their ancient faith, with 
the exception of certain feas> and days of mourning, whereof 
they had long forgotten the origin. Only a few of the old 
women before a marriage or a burial, or any other event of 
importance, would occasionally creep down to the vault and 
pour a libation to the -tatue of Osiris that wore the crown a id 
feathers of Amen-' ^ as, in an hour of danger, Bakhita had 
made Mea do at nbu-Simbel. 

This survival was interesting, but Rupert was never able to 
discover whether it ^ad descended from the ancient days, or 
whether they had learnt the practice from the sculptures on 
the temple and the paintings in the vault, which showed the 
departed rulers and their wives and attendants pouring such 
libations before this very statue. At least, of the old religion 
nothmg else remain !, nor could anyone in Tama read th« 
hieroglyphics. It was her desire to acquire this and other 
learning, and to become acquainted with those men and the 
wonderful outside world, whereof rumours had reached her in 
her isolated solitude, that had caused Mea to disguise herself 
and spend two years at the school at Luxor. Here, although 
as she found to her disappointment, they did not teach 
hieroglyphics, she had accumulated a considerable quantity of 
miscellaneous knowledge of men and things, including a 
superficial acquaintance with the English tongue, in which she 
loved to talk. 

Now she insisted upon continuing her education under 
Ruperts guidance, and as they had only one book, the 
instruction took the form of lectures upon history, literature 
art, and everything else under the sun with which he had the 
slightest acquaintance. It was a strange sight to see them in 
one of the big rooms of her house, Mea seated at a little table 
and Rupert limping to and fro upon his crutch, and holding 
forth on all things, human and Divine, such as Egyptology~of 



J. 



Kupert mahes ^betoiince 205 

which he really knew something; modern political history, 
espcciaUy that of Africa, and religion. Indeed, th-i last pUyed 
a large part in their studies, for as it happened among the few 
belongings that were saved from the saddle-bags of his camel 
was Rupert's Bible, that same skin-bound volume which had 
excited Edith's wonder and interest. Therefore it was out of 
this Bible that he made her read to him, with the result that 
she learned from it more than the letter. As he intended that 
she should, soon she began to appreciate the spirit also, and 
in Its light to understand much ihat had puzzled her in 
Rupert's conduct towards htrself and others. But the 
knowledge did not teach her to love him less, only perhaps 
she honoured him the more. 

So the weeks passed on, and strange as were the conditions 
of his life, not altogether unhappily for Rupert. As yet it was 
impossible for him to leave the oasis for the reasons that have 
been given, and sometimes with a sudden sense of shame, he 
awoke to the fact that this detention was no longer the agony 
to him that it had been at first; that now indeed he could 
endure it with patience. Of course the truth was that we are 
all of us very much the creatures of our immediate surround- 
mgs, and that the atmosphere of this peaceful desert home had 
crept into his being, bringing with it rest, if not content. He 
had suflTered so much in mind and body, and now he was not 
called upon to suffer. So skilful was she in her dealings with 
him, so well did she veil her heart in its wrappings of courtesy 
and friendship, that he ceased even, or at any rate to a gr. at 
extent, to be anxious about Mea. 

He tried to forget that passionate scene, and when he did 
think of It his modesty prompted him to believe that it really 
meant nothing. Eastern women were, he knew, very impulsive, 
al«) very changeful. Probably what had moved her, although 
at the time she did not know it, was not devotion to a si attered 
hulk of a man like himself, but as she had said at the beginning, 
pity for his sad state of which indirectly she was the cause. 



> I 



306 



TTbe m$iv of tbe Spirit 



At least he hoped that it was so, and what we hope earnestly 
m time we may come to believe. So that touble was smoothed 
away, or at an> rate remained in abeyance. 

For the rest those palms and n' .ntain-tops, those bubbling 
waters and green fields, that solemn, ruined temple and those 
towermg pylons, were better than the parks and streets of 
London, or that hateful h;4bitati5n in Grosvenor Square wher.» 
Lord Devene leant against his haunted marble mantel-pierc 
and mocked. Indeed, had it not been for Edith and his 
mother, Rupert would, he felt, be coxitsnt, now that hisjcareer 
had gone, iv renounce the world and live in Tama all his days. 
But these tv;o— the wife who must think herself a widow, and 
the mother who believed herself sonless, he longed ceaselessly 
to see again. For their sakes, day by day he watched for an 
opportunity of escape. 
At length it came. 
Rupert Bey," said Mea quietly to him one morning in 
Arabic as they sat down to their usual lesson, "I have good 
news for you. By this time to-morrow you may be gone from 
here, ' and whilst pretending to look down at the parchment 
upon which she was writing with a reed pen, as her forefathers 
might have done twenty centuries before-for paper was scarce 
with them-she watched his face from beneath her long lashes 
The intelligence stunned him a little, preventing-perhaps 
fortunately^any outbreak of exuberant joy. Indeed, he only 
answered in the words of the Arabic proverb : 

" After calm, storm ; after peace, war," and the reply seemed 
to satisfy Mea, although she knew that this proverb had an end 
to it — "after death, paradise— or hell." 
" How, Mea? " he asked presently. 

"A big caravan too strong to be attacked, is going to cross 
the Nile above Wady- Haifa and pass through the Nubian 
desert to the shores of the Red Sea beyond the country that is 
held by Osman Digna. Its chief, who is known to our people 
and a true man, makes the pilgrimage to Mecca. I have sent 



Vtupert mafied ^bet^ance 






207 

Z' onir *° *'''"• " ^ '' ^"""« ^^*' >°" «»»°">d accompany 
hm. only you must not say who you are. and if they meet an J 
white men you must promise not 10 talk .0 them. oSsc 

ChrisZ."'""' ''^ '"° ^'^"'^'^ ^°' ^'^ befriending T: 

"I will promise that," answered Rupert. 

"Good ! Then you leave here to-morrow morning at the 
dawn. Now, let us go on with the lesson ; it is myla'st '• 

consJs'ted Srr'"^ " very desultory performance ; indeed, it 
consisted chiefly of a compilation by Rupert of lists of books 
^hich he instructed Mea she was to send to Egypt to buy ai 
cZ " I, '"/'' '" °PP°"""''y' •■" -d- tM she migM 

lost^r . ' !^"'f "" ^' '^"^'^- ^"' Mea seemed to have 
lost all mterestm the future improvement of her mind. 

What was the good of learning, she asked, if there was 
nobody to ta.k to of what she had learned ? B^khita ^d no 
care or these things, and the others had never heard of them 

Still she took the lists and said she would send or the 
books when she could, that was. after the countrrgrew 

The rest of that miserable day went by somehow There 
were meals to eat as usual ; also Rupert's dromedary hid to 
be got up. and a store of food made ready for his^ournev 
Mea wanted him to take money, of which she had a ceS 
amount hidden away-several thousand pounds indeed-Th« 
products of her share of sales of horse's and corn w^ ch 

bourLmT"'"r^"^^'"'^' ^^*^^"'"« merchants who 
bought from them cheap and sold to the Egyptian Govern- 
ment, or others, dear. But this he would not touch nor 
did he need to do so. for in his clothes when he Ls caplured 
were sewn about a hundred pou^ ' -ome infold In/^ 
bank-notes, which he thoueht T I ^ '°™^ '" 

to England. ^ "* '"^"'^"^ *° t«ke him 

.It was night. All was prepared. ' Ruper't had Lid his 



ao8 



ttbc m$iv of tbe SiMm 



ferewelU to the emir, and chief men, who .eemed very «>rry 
that he w., going. Mea had vanished wmewherJI^r^ 

<Uy, Rup.,, ,«,k hi, crutch „d ..Ikcl ,hro"gh .h" ^on^f 

™in'c:r:'o.r,::s."' "■' ""■"' '"" "■»•"• •- "• 

Through the hypostyle hall he went where o«l. fl.*-^ 
•niong the great c61umns. till he came to ti! entL^ 

the sarcophagi were dragged. Here he stopped see'' Z 

oi^Thrf ''!""''°"«^ by the fidgeting and lowgr. C 

as houfh^'l, r/°"" ^'^^ ''°P* ^d '«'"'n^ S 
^^^t^ough he Wished to call his attent.on to something 

At length I -s curiosity was excited, and led bv the doa 
Rupert descended the long slope . th; foot of whLh L th^ 

bLI ^ J X. l'"P"'« °" ^"'«"y' P^'ceived by its ravs 
Bakhita and Mea, the former bending over the pool andT 
^t^r wrapped in a dark cloak, seat'ed natile f^i^att 
edge Guessmg that the old gipsy was celebratinTanothe 

stira^nrheT^^""^ '- ^^-'-^ ^^^ ^^^ - ^^^>^^ 

Presently he saw her thrust out from the side of the pool a 
boat about as l«:ge as that which boys sail upon the wa^s of 
thel^ndon parks. It was built upon the moSel of the ^* L^^^ 
Egyptian funerary barges with a half dec?: fomarr*uL^hf"K 
lay something that looked like a little .numm^'Z 17^1 
a smgle sail set. B.khita gave it a str ,g ^ns^Z' Lut 



le 
le 

!• 

I. 

Il 
t 
f 
1 
i 



^linpctt imfttB 9beiMtice 



1 



Mly. Now .h. lid ™L' "°",T"" '»'"« «">«°««i. f. >." 

u"e«d . kind of „v«.Z?w?h T ' "*"" ■• "'"^ «d 
undeneand i^ „„ . "' "'"'=''• '° '" •• !■« could h„, ,„d 

•hall .um. .„d wh„; ^,' ^' «' ™'. «" wl,«. hi. fj, 

>»«. le. hi, Double ,«.hrLn ?'•."""= ""y- B"'. 
b™.he i„,o ,h, „i, Bo.,C ^^"^ """'• •" •"•» Spiri 
life, in >he „. J. „f o,iri, |oM ",' '" 't' """" "' »■. lord of 
which w., hi., ,„ „S^^'.L°:fh°'..'r''; ' "1 T ^ "»' 
bid. U iMt Boat, boa., obtyl'" • ^^ "' *° "«" 

l^oat remained stiil. then otoulT ^"' * ""'^^ ''^'^« '»»« 
blew about these caverns s^med to rr""' ^™"«^^» *»'*' 
it drew away across the wat« *" "' ""' *"d »'<>^ly 

'•lUoes west." whispered Mea. 
Aye, answered Bakhita- ««»«.* •. . 
bide in the west?" ' ^«st as he does. But will it 

" I pray not," answered Mea «'*,„/.• 
west has been the land of death n T.t 7 ^'°'" ^^ ^^^ the 
these waters lie the sepul'h^^ ^ ^^^^^^^^ ^° *^« -t of 
the west bank of the Nile th.,- r ! """ '*'*'' beyond 
people la,-d their deld nI/ L ! I "''"'^ °' ^^" °« 
where Osiris rules, the cold anH "^ "°* '" ^^^^ ^^st 

return to the House of Ra and inTTf "'''' ^^*"'". 
Thiie ah. ' "" '" bis light abirf#. » 

^" " "" '" °"' ""^ -kt:' 'a „„, .„ 



310 



XSbc mws ot tbe Spirit 



herself in the Eastern fashion, all the while intently watching 
the little lamp that showed the position of the boat. Having 
reached the western edge of the pool, it seemed inclined to 
remain there, whereon Mea, turning to Bakhita, began to 
scold her, asking her why she had brought her there to see 
this childish play, and whether she thought that she, Mea, 
who had been educated at Luxor and received many lessons 
from the Bey, believed in her silly magic, or that a toy boat, 
even though it did carry a man's foot made up like a mummy, 
could possibly tell whither he would wander. 

" If the boat sails right, then you will believe ; if it sails 
wrong, then you will hot believe. That I expected, and it is 
best," answered Bakhita drily, and at that moment something 
happened to the little lamp that stood before the mummy foot, 
for suddenly it went out. 

Now Mea grew positively angry, and spoke sharp words to 
Bakhita as to her methods of divination and the benighted 
and primitive condition of her intelligence in general. 

" Were I to accept the augury of your boat," she said, " I 
must be sure not only that he will stay in the west, but that 
he will die there, for look, the light is out." 

" Other things die bejide men's bodies," answered Bakhita, 
in her brief fashion ; " their hopes, or beliefs, or perhaps their 
good luck — who can say ? " 

As she spoke, suddenly out from the darkness of the pool 
into the ring of light cast by the lamp which Bakhita bore, 
that fairy boat came gliding. The gust of wind blowing down 
the western sepulchres beyond the pool, which extinguished 
its lamp, had also caught its sail and brought it back, half 
filled with water shipped in turning ; brought it back swiftly, 
but sailing straight to where Mea knelt upon the edge of the 
pool. She saw it, and with a little cry of joy, bent herself 
over the water, and stretching out her rounded arms, caught 
the boat just before it sank, and hugged it to her breast. 

" Put the thing down," said Bakhita. " You don't believe 



IRupert maftes ^l^efsance 



an 






in it, and it is wet and will spoil your robe. Nay, the Bey's 
foot is mine, not yours. I brought it from the Wells." 

Then they began to quarrel over this poor mummied relic 
of which Rupert thought that he had seen the last many a 
day before, while he took an opportunity to beat his retreat. 
Bakhita and her ancient spells were, as usual, interesting! 
though when they involved a lest fragment of himself they 
became somewhat gruesome. But in such things he had no 
belief whatsoever; they only attracted him as historical, or 
rather as spiritual survivals. What moved him about the 
matter was Mea's part in it, revealing, as it did, that her 
mterest in his future had in no way abated. Indeed, he felt 
that it would be long before he was able to forget the touching 
sight of this wayward and beautiful girl, this desert-bred 
daughter of kings, snatching the sinking boat and its grizzly 
burden from the water and pressing them to her breast as though 
they were a living child. Meanwhile, the accident that he had 
seen it did not make this farewell less difficult. 

When at length he reached the house— for amongst the 
fallen stones of the temple his progress with a crutch was 
slow— Rupert sat down upon its steps, feeling sure that Mea 
would wish to see him, and that it would be well to get that 
parting over. Presently the mongrel at his side began to 
bark, and next minute he saw her walking slowly up the 
path towards him, her cloak open and the breast of her robe 
still wet where she had pressed the dripping boat against it. 
He struggled from the step to meet her. 

"Sit, Rupert Bey," she said; "sit. Why trouble you to 
rise for me ? " 

" I cannot sit while you stand," he answered. 

"Then I sit also, on the other side of the dog. He look 
like the god on the wall, does he hot, what you call him— 
Anubis. brother of Osiris? No, don't growl at me, 
Anubis; I no hurt your master, you nasty little god of 
the dead." 



r 



213 



Ude ma^ of tbe Spfvit 



"Where have you been, and why is your dress wet ?" asked 
Rupert. 

"Ask Anubis here, he wise, knows as much at. his master. 
I been to the burying-place and lean over holy water to look 
if I grow more ugly than usual." 

" Stuff ! " answered Rupert. 

"You no believe me? Well, then, perhaps I thirsty and 
dnnk water. Much weep make me thirsty. No believe still ? 
Then perhaps I look in water and see pictures there." 

" What pictures can you see in that dark place? " 

" Oh, plenty, dark no matter. See things inside, like you 
when you blind. I tell you what I see ; I see you come b 
here, and so I Mfeep no more. I— I— happy. Make tnat 
dog go the other side. He want to bite me now, he jealous 
because you look at me, not him." 

Accordingly the protesting Anubis was rearranged, and 
continued his snarlings and grumblings from a safer 
distance. 

" Some more of old Bakhita's nonsense, I suppose," said 
Rupert. " I thought that you had given up believing in her 
myths and omens." 

" What mean myths and omens ? No matter ; Bakhita old 
fool, gods old stones, believe in none of them. You say it, so 
all right. Believe in you, and me— inside, what my heart tell 
me. My heart tell me you come back. That why I happy." 

" Then I am afraid, Mea, that your heart knows more than 
I do." 

"Yes," she answered, "think more; feel more, so know 
more. TAaf all right ; what do you expect ? " Then suddenly 
dropping her jerky and peculiar English, Mea addressed him 
in her solemn and native Arabic. " Hark you, Rupert, guest 
of my home, guest of my heart, preserver of my body, who 
shed your blood for me. You think me foolish, one who tries 
to warm her hands at the fires of the marsh, one who plucks 
flowers that fade, and believes them immortal stars fallen 



r 



tRnvctt maftea ©bcteancc 



213 

to deck her breast and hair V^f ci,^ c j 

marsh fire, and in the dead^o«.'K °*^' "'"'"^^ '" ^'^e 

death s«„ds wharf life tuld Le L" ' """^ ^^1; ^^ 
to you, Ruoert Bev vo„^ • f ^"'^ '"^J' ^^^"ce 

setting sunT ^ '" *^' '°^^' ^«*^^" '^"d of the 

"Do you mean that I shall find my wife dead?" h. o u ^ 
with a quiver in his voice. "Is that 7hl f '^^'^' 

your pool ?" ** *^® P'*^'"'e you saw in 

and^^'will' 7JT'' ' ^° "°* '°°^- I think she lives 

di. Ccan'dt :: cTn t^^ TIV 'T '''' ^ 
know nothing • I L^I ^ *^" ^^^ ^ '^^^o^' "ot. I 

tells me wrone Still I L ' ™'' ?=■•*»»« it 

should so bewtthat ^L T '° '"'"' *''■ " *i"8s 

lov. then .ha. ,ou .^U cl^Vrtot'mra„d°''to "™ 
Swear ,, now by the na,»e of you, God Tesus .„ r T' 
sure that you will keep the oath » '' ' ° ' "">' '"= 

wh;'htrdi ir af :sr "■^" -^ ""'"^'^- - '«— 

I telf IThati? """r "''- "'"' "'"• Hear me and decide 

ask iLr o wirthrtl "™ '^''' •'"" ' "- I ^° no; 
see you daZ da ! V.' rT-.T. "^"" '° ""f. ">« ' -<= 'o 



why. 



But, Mea," he said, 



'it 



see you, then I die 



may be impossible. You know 



'If it 



I die 



imposs 
Perhaps 



ible. so be it, I die. Then it is better that 
kill myself, I do not know, at any rate I go 



314 



Ubc mas ot tbe Spirit 



away. I ask not that you should swear to come, if it should 
make you break your oath to others, only if there are no 
more oaths to keep. Now choose, Rupert Bey. Give me 
life or give me death, as you desire. Make your decree. I 
shall not be angry. Declare your will that your servant may 
obey," and she rose and stood before him with bent head and 
hands humbly crossed upon her breast. 

He looked at her. There could be no doubt she was in 
earnest. Mea meant what she said, and she said that if he 
did not gratify this strange wish of hers, and refused to give 
her any hope of his return, she would die, or at least so he 
understood her ; and was certain that if she had the hope, s!ie 
would not die and bring her blood upon his head. Rupert 
looked at her again, standing there in the moonlight like some 
perfect statue of humility, and his spirit melted within him, 
a blush of shame spread itself over his scarred and rugged 
features, shame that this loyal-hearted and most honoured 
woman should thus lay her soul naked before him, saying 
that it must starve if he would not feed it with the crumb 
of comfort that it desired. Then he hesitated no longer. 

'• Mea," he said, in the kind and pleasant voice that was 
perhaps his greatest charm—" Mea, my law says: 'Swear not at 
all' ; I read it to you the other day. Now, Mea, will my word 
do instead ? " 

" My lord's word is as other men's oaths," she answered, 
lifting her humble eyes a little. 

Then he bent forward, resting on his knee, not as an act of 
adoration, but because it was difficult to him to rise without 
assistance, and stretching out his hand, took her crossed 
hands from her breast, and bowing himself, pressed them 
against his forehead, thus— as she, an Eastern, knew well- 
prostrating himself before ber, making the ancient obeisance 
that a man can only make with honour to his liege sovereign, 
or to one who has conquered him. 
," My lady Tama," he went on, "after one other my life is 



IRupert ntaftea Obeisance 



215 

you« for you gave it back to me, and after her and my mother 
U^ere hves no woman whom I honour half so much aTyou 

and h 'wk' "' '"'"'• ^^^^^^°^^' ^^«-' «Jnce you w shTt' 
and hmk that ,t would make you happier, should I perchan e 
be left alone-which God forbid !-I promise you that I wu! 
come to you and spend my life with you until yo^weary o 
me--not as a husband, which you say you do not deJire 
which also might be impossible, but as a brother and 1 frLnd 

wed t'o htr "^' "^- ^° ''''" ^"'^ ^^ ^--^ ^- !^-t 
nnrf . u ! "'^ ""^'^ '" *^« F^as^em fashion, with his owr^ 

live . Yef 'l wm V °'^v ""^^ ' ""^ "°* ^'^ ^ I -i" 
because I shall r ^'^ '"•^ ^'^' ""^^ " J^^^^ beyond price, 
because I shall know, even if you do not come, that you mav 

come some time, and that if you never come, yet you wouS 

thaTtrflow/°"r''-;'^^ ^^^ -arsh-light;s^rue L a„d 
tha the flower will one day be a star. For soon or late we 

1 T? ''""' ^"P^^^ ^^y' 0">y. yo" should Lt have 
prostrated yourself to me, who am all unworthy. WeU I wm 

b^eTha\^outel- ::^^ °' ^°"^^ ^^^^ ^ -^ -<^^ ^^ -<i 

Bibt K^ulklk^^^^^^^ "' '^^"^^' '^^^ ^^^ ^--^ o^' 
Mel^TeT^'^^.'^f 'T/'''^ '°'' '"^^''"S ^^^^ I ^-J-« '"ore, 
and for .hat reason I am very glad to give it to you. Onl^ 

s ke notb"' °"".^^^— ' f- ---and believe for Truth^s 
sake, not because it would please me " 

^'^ '' s't it'Lo^tt 'k''^'''" ?' '''^' '' '''' ^^^'^ ^he book and 
St It into f--: bosom of her loose robe. 
M, f^ . » . jjjgjjj. ^g^ ^^^^^ ^^^.^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ _^ silence, 



length, perhaps because she was unable 



to speak, she 



w 



U 



I' 

1 ■ 



ai6 



Ube ma^ of tbe Sptnt 



lif^ her hands held them over him as though in blessing. 
Aen turned and gUded away into th. shadows of the 

He did not see her any more. 



\ 



\ 



L 



CHAPTER XVI 

MEANWHILE 

walen, . black and dirty tramp la! ' k °" ""^ *'~' 

"^ coak to the East ^^,7^ T ' ^'"^ "«'' " "" '» 
Thames with the .^ ' "!!?,''" "™ "^"'P'"« "P "« 
face of the river makto Ai* *,"■"*'' ''"'K ''""B over the 

outlines of «,:";S;s'on tnk tdTh"' ".' '""™« "" 
of the church bells-fori, tTsunT. 7* " "^ """" 
'hough their clappers hU b^n muffl^^T ■•""'/• " 

-d"::rc-;iX^te'i's^X«^-:^^ 

which he had Purchased'T.^tfsa'forPh"'";,' T™' 
■i> good health, but his men.,l l„jv ^^^^"^"f he was 

« one Of nerlous ttTb^^Itr Std'^'^r^ 
suspense. What npw« «^.-J ^ u- ^ ^"^ months of 

wondered, andhow^o" m f ^'V "'^ ™™' '>°™. he 
"ipple, b; receiv^,™"" "'• ' ^'^'^"^ and mutilated 

own name'hadTeapto ht e^e* Z *"'V° " '°°'"'« =" "• "- 
i» Parliament coScemL 'hL ^^'one had asked a question 

been «n, what « Th^^fac™ f'l ' ™^°"-''y " had 
■ne facts of the rumours of its annihila- 



ai8 



TTbe Mas of tbe Spirit 



tion, whether it was true that this disaster had been brought 
about through the envoy, Lieutenant-Colonel Ullershaw, C.B., 
having mixed himself up in tribal quarrels over a native woman, 
and what was the pecuniary loss involved to the country? 
Then followed the answer of the Secretary of State, the man 
who had pressed him to go on the grounds of duty and 
patriotism. It stated that Colonel Ullershaw had been 
despatched to carry out certain confidential negotiations 
with a number of sheiks on the borders of the Soudan. 
That according to the report received from the Egyptian 
authorities, a native sergeant named Abdullah, who accom- 
panied him, had arrived at Cairo and informed them that all 
the members of the mission, who were disguised as merchants, 
had been attacked by a petty chief called Ibrahim and 
destroyed, Abdullah alone escaping. That it appeared from 
this survivor's evidence that the attack was not political, but 
had its origin in Colonel Ullershaw having unfortunately tried 
to protect two native women who were travelling with him, 
one of whom, stated to be a young person of some rank, was 
claimed by the sheik Ibrahim as a wife. That the loss to the 
country, or rather to the Egyptian Government, amounted to 
about two thousand pounds, of which one thousand was in 
cash. 

Arising out of this were other questions, evidently framed to 
annoy the Government upon a small matter, such as : Was it 
true that Colonel Ullershaw had been chosen over the heads 
. of more suitable persons, because his great family influence 
had been brought to bear upon the War Ofl!ice? To tl he 
answer was that the deceased officer's record had been v. .y 
distinguished, and he was chosen because of his diplomatic 
experience, his knowledge of Arabic and personal acquaintance 
with the sheiks, with whom it was necessary to communicate : 
That, as the House would be aware, his family influence as 
represented in that House, and, he might add, in another 
place, was not likely to unduly influence Her Majesty's present 



I 



f 



AeanwbUe 319 

advisers, of whom the gentlemen concerned were strong and 
able opponents. (A laugh.) 

The thirst for information not being yet appeased, an Irish 
member asked whether it was true that a punitive expedition 
had been sent to kill the chief whose wife Colonel Ullershaw 
had stolen-Oaughter); and whether the Government now 
regretted their choice of Colonel Ullershaw as the head of 
this mission. 

Answer : That such an expedition had been sent, but that it 
appeared that Colonel Ullershaw and his party had made a 
very gallant fight before they were overwhelmed, and that 
eitner he, or, as was stated by some nomads, the lady, whom 
he had befriended, with the help of her tribesmen had already 
killed the sheik Ibrahim and most of his men, whose corpses 
had been seen by the nomads hanging to some trees : That 
the Government admitted that their choice had not been 
justified by events, but that he, the Secretary of State, 
deprecated the casting of slurs upon very insufficient informa- 
tion upon the memory of a brave and devoted servant of his 
country— (hear, hear!)-whose mistakes, whatever they might 
have been, seemed to have sprung from the exaggerated 
chivalry of his nature. (A laugh.) 

Another Irish member: Was it true that Colonel Ullershaw 
had been married on the day he left England to enter 
upon this mission? The Speaker: "Order, order. This 
House has nothing to do with the domestic concerns of the 
late Colonel Ullershaw." 

The Honourable member apologised for his question, 
remarking that his excuse for it must be that the country, or 
Egypt, had to pay in lives and money for the domestic 
entanglements of Colonel Ullershaw, in which he became 
involved among the desert sands. (Much laughter and cries 
of order.) He wished to ask the Right Honourable gentleman 
whether he was sure that the gallant Colonel— (more laughter) 
— was really dead ? 



230 



TTbc WU)? of tbc Spirit 



^The Secretary of War : « I fear there is no doubt upon that 
The subject then dropped. 

Turning over the paper in a dazed fashion-for the crueltv 
and .njust.ce of these questions and the insinuation sol^y 
made for party purposes cut him to the heart-Rupert had 

Zle^ •r"'-^"'^^'^^'^ ^'^^"-^ '^^ matterTnato e 

write of fr°-*"'% ^''"^ '" ^PP^^'^'^" °^«^"> ^he leader- 
wnter of the journal seemed to assume that the facts were 
correctly stated, and that the unfortunate officer concerned 
brought a^ut the failure of the mission and lost his own hTe 
by a cou se of action so foolish as to be discreditable in 
which, as u stated. " the ever-present hand of female influe'ne 
can unfortunately be traced." It added that deeply as 1 

Itn. \r" "'" '*' ^^"^^ '^^ country 'well an- 

utSw" ^'!. T *° ^' ''''''''^' P^^h^P^ '-' Colonel 
Ullershaw u was the best thing that could have happened. 

smcc t seemed probable that in any event his career would 
nave b ,on at an end. 

After reading this report and comment, Rupert's common- 
sense and knowledge of official ways assured him that. Tow- 
ever unjustly, he was in all probability a ruined man. On the 
ch^ges about the lady in the desert he might, it is true, be 
?nr H r / r"* complexion, but it would be impossible 
for him to deny that the unfortunate presence of Bakhita and 
J?!r t 'k f u ' ^'"'"^^'^te cause of his disaster, or indeed 
that he had been spending several months as their guest. 

wHoT/k ^"'^^'' ''°^''''' ^'^'^' ""^^'"2 f^«^t that he 
f!n^H ^T '.T''^ '° '"'''"^' ^^^ utterly and completely 
failed, and by faihng, exposed those who employed him to 
sharp cnticism and unpleasant insinuations. Lastly, the 
circumstance that he was now a hopeless cripple wouW of 
smiSs **^^" advantage of to dispense with his further 



1 



anxious to get hom^ an j^ I u ^^^ Besides, he was 

the matter In C ' I "'"^ '*'"' '^ ^* ^ad opened up 
Intr L ve^r^^^^^^^^^ r'^^^y be detLd fo^ 

investigations. ^ ^ ^ '^^ P"' ""^^^ ^^'-'^^t pending 
Rupert's journey across the desert u^a u 

t:'^t% z^rr r^Uerr "v"""*-'^ 

bourhood ot Tama he {a7.7 1 t ^'""^ *^^ "^'S^* 

provided hi„ ^a'^^dlf'llX^rr r r wt 
broug . w.,h .hem a .em and a„,p,e provis , He .."de,^ 

r„irb?.t:L^dT.:2:^ir::ri? 

safely when he parted wUh i. « .he waTer ? 1 T ""'." 
dog and fearing .o hur. her feelings shonldT I . 

.ha?r :'\T " ""-^ "'"■ -^--i* 'he" zi„t 

^.^. found h™.e,f regarded as a grea. personage i^he 

At length they reached a little port on the RpH «:», u 
.hepilgr,™. .0 Mecca proposed I prZ^^l^^^iZ' 
and, as i. chanced, found .here .his English coliterrhi 
.a .ng in fresh wa.er. On her Ruper.'™\: ,"'«:' ™ 
pilf lis, passing himself off as one of them for th^ ,.Jrl r 
.be collier was glad to earn a li..le by .Zg ^L engS Th° 
l«. .ha. he saw of .he deser. was his Taria 'escoTwChav^g 



ilil 



bi 



•i^r^r^^ 



•tt 



Zbt Tnuv of tbe spirit 



kissed his hand and made their dignifleU farewells, were 
turning their camels' heads homewards, the poor cur, Anubis, 
notwithstanding his howls and struggles, being secured in a 
basket which was fastened to the side of one of the said camels. 
No ; that was not quite the last, for as the boat rowed out to 
the steamer which lay at a little distance, it passed a jutting 
spit of land that gave shelter to the shallow harbour. Of a 
sudden from this promontory there floated up a sound of wild, 
sad music, a music of pipes and drums. Rupert recognised it 
at once ; it was the same that he had heard when he rode with 
Bakhita and Me a from Abu-Simbel, the music of the Wandering 
Players, those marvellpus men who refused baksheesh. 

As the morning mist lifted he saw them well, on the sandy 
beach within twenty yards of the boat. There were the five 
muffled figures squatted on the ground, three blowing at their 
pipes and two seated opposite to them beating drums to time. 
As before they seemed to take not the sligiiie&t :otice of the 
passers-by, except that their music grew wilder and more shrill. 
An English sailor in the boat shouted to them to stop that 
funeral march and play something funny, but they never lifted 
their heads, whereon, remarking that theirs was a queer way to 
earn a living, caterwauling to the birds and fishes, the sailor 
turned his attention to the tiller and thought no more about 
them. But even on the ship their melancholy music could be 
heard floating across the water, although the players themselves 
were lost in the haze. Indeed, it was while Rupert read the 
report of what had passed in the House of Commons in the old 
paper which he found in the deck cabin, that its last wailing 
burst reached him and slowly faded into silence. 

At Suez the pilgrims left the steamer, but as she suited him 
very well, and the fare demanded did not make any big hole in 
his ;^ioo, he revealed himself as an Englishman and booked 
a passage on to London. Now London was in sight, yonder 
it lay beneath that dark mass of cloud, and — what would he 
find there ? He had not telegraphed from Suez or Port Said. 









It WW, he felt, impoMible to explain matters in a cable, and 
what could be the use. especially as then everything would get 

from that paper, therefore no one would incur extra suspense 
or sorrow by waititig for a few more days, to find that he. 
or some of him, was still alive. He longed to see his wife 
with a great longing ; by day and by night he thought of her. 
r^him ^^^ '°''* ^""^ sympathy with which she would 

Yet at times doubts did cross his mind, for Edith loved sue 
cess, and he was now an utter failure, whose misfortunes must 
involve her also. Could he be the same Rupert Ullershaw who 
had left Charing Cross railway station nine months before, 
prosperous, distinguished, chosen for an important mission 
with a great career before him ? Undoubtedly he was, but al 
these things had left him; like his body his future was utterly 
marred, and his presen^ seemed almost shameful. Nothini 
remained to him now except his wile s love. 

He comforted himself. She would not withhold that who 
had taken him for better or worse ; indeed it was the nature 
of women to show unsuspected qualities when trouble overtook 
those who were dear to them. No ; upon this point he need 
not torment himself, but there were others 

Was he to tell Edith the dreadful secret of her birth which 
had haunted him like a nightmare all these weary months? 
Sooner or later he supposed that it must be done. And must 
he meet Lord Devene, and if so. what was he to say when they 
did meet? Then Edith would want to know the truth of this 
story of the lady in the desert, which, of course, she had a rigKt 
to learn in its every detail. There was nothing in it '% 
was no more than a dear friend to him ; indeed he had thought' 
o her but httle lately, whose mind was so preoccupied w!th 
other matters. Yet he felt that the tale of their relationship, 
told exactly as it occurred, and he could repeat it in no other 
way, might be open to misinterpretation, as the facts of his 



hi 



fit 

- wf 
■ ^ i 



224 



Ube Mtcs of tbe Spirit 



' I 



escort of her and her aunt across the desert had been 
already. 

Well, she would have to take his word for it, and even if she 
did not estimate that quite as high as Mea had done, at least 
she knew that he was no teller of lies. Then after these 
difficulties were overcome, how was he to live ? He had saved 
a little money, and perhaps as a wounded man they might give 
him a small pension, out of which his heavy insurance would 
have to be paid, if indeed it did not absorb it all. There 
remained her father's — he winced as the word came into his 
mind — settlement upon Edith, but that income, personally, 
he would rather starve than touch. Still his wife must be 
supported in a wdy commensurate with her position. This 
outlook, too, was so black that he ^.bandoned its consideration 
and fell to thinking of the joy of his meeting with his mother. 

Here at least there were no ifs or buts. She would under- 
stand, she would console; his misfortunes would only make him 
dearer to her. For the rest, sufficient to the day was its evil ; 
the morrow must take care of itself. It was indeed sufficient ! 



Now while the old tramp lumbers up the Thames through 
the grey December mist and sleet, let us turn f©r a few 
minutes to the fortunes of some of the other personages in 
this history. 

After her husband's departure, Edith returned to live with 
Mrs. Ullershaw, which was an inexpensive arrangement, and, as 
she explained to Dick, the right kind of thing to do. Several 
letters arrived from Rupert, the last written at Abu-Simbel 
the night before he began his fatal journey, and some were 
sent in reply which he never received. Then came the long 
silence, and after it the awful, sudden catastrophe of which they 
learned first from a Cairo telegram in an evening paper. Rupert 
was dead, and she, Edith, who had never bec" a wife, was left 
a widow. The blow overwhelmed her. All her card castle 
came tumbling about her ears. Now she could never be the 



jfl^anwbUe 



335 

grave, he who in due course sho, M V "^^ °' " *«« 
•be riches, peeresses m England Yeri™^ °' "" ""= ^ 
".us, be exchanged for a wM "t wSs sle :'%**' ''"''' 
a Fate that had played such a mT ? "' '"'""^ •""' 

were „ore those of aZ' 'Cn JT "' T" "^ "«- 
fashion she tno-rned him tmfy ' '""'"'■ ""'°e'> i" >>« 

Abdullah's garhleLIwhfch as thouT'''^,,*' ""'"'^ »' 
to Edith, leaving her to n,!, • * """'"'ngly, he told 

chose. * " '° P"' "•»"« "bat construction she 

no;i'ie::T«':,r .!trr- ^^ » ^^ bear. She did 
into any siUy mess wllh a sav^ge^"^" '•°""' "'^ <■- «»' 

;b:t°[roTa:■:sr:?XaXTrtr^^" '- 

By mixing himself un with thil \ "°" °f ""sdom. 

.bemurderof thewhol"ld : IZli^T^" ■''^' 
In a way, it is as well for him th., u • "'^ mission. 

for he had compwll^t t h^ser ' ^rr;'"""' 
matter now." "'mseit. Well, u doesn't 

"No," she answered heavilv " ,> a^ ,. 
now." ^"'» '^ doesn't matter 

and T-ord Southwick before the former ^ "'^ °' ^'"'^ 
the House, he talked somewha. d Zn*" H °" '"""' '" 
indeed of a tolerant man of the ,0^'' """' '"= '""' 

di;r:f':re^;^'Vi:t'^^^^^^^^^^^^ -- -- '^=^ 

other men," and he smiled ..^k ^'' weaknesses like 

■■and.hedeser.wasX^y--r:hr3^^^^^^^ 






.-_ ..i->" 



aa6 



XTbe Wws oX tbe Spirit 



■is 

Si' ; 









one of the women as young and beautiful. Who couW say, 
and what did it matter ? " and so forth. 

But the Secretary of State, an austere man who did not like 
to see his schemes wrecked, and himself attacked on account 
of such " weaknesses," thought that it mattered a great deal. 
Hence the tone of his answers in the House, for it never 
occurred to him, or indeed to Lord Southwick, that a relation 
would have said as much as Dick did, unless he was very sure 
of his ground. In fact, they were certain that he was putting 
forward the best version of the truth and of Ullershaw's 
character that was possible under the circumstances. Who 
would wish, they reflected, to throw a darker shade upon the 
reputation of a dead man than he was absolutely forced to do 
by the pressure of sure and certain knowledge ? 

As for Mrs. Ullershaw, when she was assured that this 
dreadful news was incontrovertible, and that her only son was 
indeed dead, she said merely in the ancient words : " The 
Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be the 
name of the Lord," and stumbled to the bed whence she never 
rose again. Here a second stroke fell upon her, but still for 
many weeks she lived on in a half-conscious state. It was 
during this time that Edith left the house, saying that her 
room was wanted by the nurses, and went into comfortable 
rooms of her own in Brook Street. 

The fact was, of course, that she could no longer endure 
this atmosphere of sickness. It was repugnant to her nature ; 
the sound of her poor mother-in-law's stertorous breathing as 
she passed her door tore her nerves, the shadow of advancing 
death oppressed her spirits which already were low enough. 
So she went and set up a manage of her own as a young widow 
had a right to do. As for Mrs. Ullershaw, by degrees she 
sank into complete insensibility and so died, making no sign. 
A week before Rupert reached England she was buried in 
Brompton Cemetery by the side of the husband who had 
treated her so ill in life. 



I 



Aeanwbfle 337 

It was a little before this that an event occurred which 
indirectly lessened Edith's material disappointment, and 
consoled Lord Devene for the death of Rupert that for his 
own reasons had grieved and disappointed him much. To 
«ie astonishment of all the world, on one fine autumn morning 
labitha presented him with a singularly healthy son. 

"This one should do!" exclaimed the doctor in triumph, 
while Lord Devene kissed it fondly. 

But when they had left the room together, his wife bade the 
nurse show her the child, and after she too had kissed it, 
said sadly : ' 

" Ach ! poor little lamb, I fear you will have no more luck 
than the rest. How should you with such a father?" she 
added in German. 

As for Dick Learmer, with the exception of the birth of this 
to him inopportune child, which now stood between him and 
the . - wealth, his fortunes seemed to wax as those of his 
rival t, waned and vanished. He was a clever man, 

with a . agreeable manner and a certain gift of shallow but 
rather amusing speech ; the kind of speech that entertains and 
even impresses for the moment, but behind which there is 
neither thought nor power. These graces soon made him 
^ceptable to that dreary and middle -class insritution. the 
House of Commons, where entertainment of any sort is so 
mre and precious a thing. Thus it happened that before long 
he came to be considered as a rising man, one with a future. 

Moreover, on one or two occasions when he addressed the 
House upon some fiscal matter, he was fortunate enough to 
impress the public with the idea that he possessed a business 
ability that m fact was no part of his mental equipment, which 
impression was strengthened by a rather clever article, mostly 
extracted from works of reference, however, that he published in 
one of the leadmg reviews. The result was that soon Dick found 
himself a director of several sound and one or two speculative, 
but for the while prosperous, companies, which, in the aggregate. 






i* • 



taS 



Ube Mws of tbe Spirit 



to say nothing of the salary that he received from Lord Devene, 
who also paid for his qualifying shares, furnished him with a 
clear income of over ;^i,3oo a year. 

Thus was the scapegrace and debt-haunted Dick Learmer 
completely white-washed and rehabilitated in the eyes of all 
who knew of his existence, and thus did he come to be 
regarded as a political possi';ility, and therefore worthy of the 
attention of party wire-pullers and of the outside world at 
large. 



i 



I 



CHAPTER XVII 



i 



WELCOME HOME ! 

Dick Learmer, dressed in an irreproachable frock-coat which 
fitted his elegant figure very well, and with a fine black pearl 
in his necktie, an advertisement of his grief for the decease of 
his codsin Rupert, was lunching tete-atite with his cousin's 
widow on that same Sunday and at the very same hour that 
Rupert was indulging in the melancholy cogitations which have 
been recorded while he munched some biscuits washed down 
with a bottle of stout in his dirty cabin on board the tramp 
steamer. The Brook Street landlady was a good cook, and 
Edith's Chablis, not to mention a glass of port, a cup of coffee, 
and a liqueur brandy that followed, were respectively excellent. 
The warm fire in the pretty little sitting-room and the cigarettes 
he smoked over it, also proved acceptable upon this particularly 
cold and dreary Sabbath afternoon. Lastly, the lovely Edith, 
dressed in very attractive and artistic mourning, was a pleasant 
object to the eye as she sat opposite to him upon a low chair 
screening her face from the fire with a feather fan from the 
mantel-piece. 

Dick, as we know, had always admired her earnestly, and 
now, whether the luncheon and the port, or the charming 
black dress set off with its white collar and cuffs, or the 
beautiful blue eyes and golden hair above were responsible 
for the result, he admired her more than ever. There was a 
pause in their conversation, during which she contemplated 
him reflectively. 

"You are getting to look dreadfully middle-aged and 

"9 ^ 




II 



It 



WS 



ajo 



Xtbe TRUai? of tbc Spirit 



respectable, Dick," she remarked presently. "It's almost 
oppressive to those who knew you in your youth." 

" I am middle-aged, and certainly I am respectable, Edith. 
Who wouldn't be that had sat yesterday upon the Board of a 
Life Insurance Society with five directors, none of whom were 
under seventy? What interest they can take in life and its 
affairs, I am sure I don't know." 

"Probably they are only interested in other people's lives, or 
other people are interested in theirs," answered Edith carelessly. 

"By the way," said Dick, "there was a question before us 
yesterday about poor Rupert's insurance." 

Edith winced a little at the name, but only looked up in 
query. 

"You know," he went on, "it was a pretty heavy one, and 
he only paid a single premium, a very bad job for the office. 
Well, you haven't claimed that ;^i 0,000, and the question 
was whether you should be communicated with on the matter. 
They settled to leave it alone, and that old death's-head of a 
chairman remarked with a grin that he had never known 
money which was due to remain unasked for. Why don't 
you ask? ;^io,ooo is always handy," he added, looking at 
her keenly. 

" I don't know," she answered. " Everybody assumes it, but 
I can't see any proof that Rupert is really dead." 

"Nonsense," he replied, almost angrily, "he is as dead as 
Julius Caesar. He must be; that Egyptian sergeant, what's 
his name, said that he saw them all shot down, and then 
himself escaped." 

"It's rather odd, Dick, that this sergeant should have 
escaped under the circumstances. Why wasn't he shot down 
too? His luck must have been remarkably good, or his legs 
remarkably swift." 

"Can't say; but fellows do have luck at times. I've met 
with some myself lately. Also, men don't live for months in a 
waterless desert." 




\l:'<S( 



i 



Welcome Dome! 



«3» 



" He might have been rescued, by these women for instance. 
The man Abdullah didn't say so, but someone else did say 
that the sheik Abraham, or whatever his name was, and his 
people were killed, for they were seen hanging upon trees. 
Now who hanged them there? Rupert and his people could 
not have done so if they themselves were already dead. 
Besides, it was not in his line." 

"Can't say," answered Dick again; "but I am sure he is 
gone. Ain't you?" 

" No, not sure, Dick, though I think he must be. And yet 
sometimes I feel as if he were near me— I feel it now, and the 
sensation isn't altogether pleasant." 

" Bosh ! " said Dick. 

"Yes, I think it's bosh too, so let us talk of something 
else." 

Dick threw th- end of his cigarette into the fire, and watched 
it thoughtfully while it burnt away. 

" You think that's half a cigarette, don't you, Edith ? " he said, 
pointing to it. 

" It doesn't look much like anything else," she answered ; 
" but of course changing into smoke and ashes." 

" It is something else, though, Edith. I'll tell you what, it 
is my rather spotted past that is burning up there, turning into 
clean white ash and wholesome-smelling smoke, like an offering 
on an altar." 

" Heavens ! Dick, you are growing poetical. What can be 
' the matter with you ? " 

" Disease of the heart, I think. Edith, do you want to 
remain a widow always?" 

" How can I tell ? " she answered uneasily. " I haven't been 
one long — yet." 

" No, but life is short ana one must look forward ; also, the 
circumstances are unusual. Edith dear, I want you to say 
that after the usual decent interval you will marry— me. No, 
doiil auiwer yet, let me have my mnings first, even if you bowl 



33> 



trbe Mai? of tbe Spirit 



I! 



ilf 



^li ! 



me out afterwards. Edith, you know that I have always been 
in love with you from a boy. All the queer things I did, rr 
most of them, were really because of you. You drove me "iid, 
drawing me on and pushing me off, and I went croppers to 
make myself forget. You remember our quarrel this day 
year. I behaved badly, and I am very sorry ; but the fact is I 
was quite mad with jealousy. I don't mind owning it now the 
poor fellow is gone. Well, since I knew that, I have been 
doing my very best to mend. I have worked like a horse 
down in that beastly House, which I hate, and learned up all 
sorts of things that I don't want to know anything about. Also, 
I have got these directorships, thanks to Devene, whose money 
was supposed to be behind me, and they are practically for 
life. So I have about ;^i,Soo a year to begin with, 
and you will have' nearly as much. That isn't exactly 
riches, but put together, it is enough for a start." 

•• No," said Edith, " it isn't riches, but two people might 
manage on it if they were economical." 

" Well," he went on quietly, " the question is whether you 
will consent to try in due course ? " and he bent forward and 
looked at her with his fine black eyes. 

" I don't know," she answered doubtfully. " Dick, I am 
sorry, but I can't quite trust you, and if marriage is to be 
successful, it must be built on other things than love and 
raptures; that is why I accepted poor Rupert." 
"Why don't you trust me?" he asked. 
"Dick, is it true that you arranged this mission of 
Rupert's in the hope that what has happened — might 
happen ? " 

•• Most certainly not 1 " he answered boldly. " I had nothing 
to do wich his mission, and never dreamed of such a thing. 
Who suggested that to you — Lord Southwick ? " 
She shook her head. 

" I never spoke to him on the matter ; indeed, I haven't 
met him since the wedding, but it was suggested." 



TKlelcome Dome ! 



233 



i 



" Devene, then, I suppose. It is just like one of his dirty 
tricks." 

But Edith only answered : " Then it is not true ? " 
" I have told you ; it is a damnable lie ! " 
" I am glad to hear it, Dick, for otherwise I could never 
have forgiven you. To be quite honest, I don't think I 
behaved well to Rupert in letting him go out there alone, 
and if I were sure that it was through you that all this was 
brought about for your own ends— and jealous men have done 
such things since David, you know— why then—" 
" Then what ? " 

"Then, Dick, we shouldn't talk any more about the 
matter. Indeed, I am not certain that we should talk at 
all, for at least he was an honest man who loved me, and 
his blood would be on your hands, and through yours on 
mine." 

" If that's all, they are clean enough," replied Dick, with a 
laugh which some people might have considered rather forced ; 
" almost as clean as your own, Edith," and stretching forward, 
he laid his hand by hers upon her dress. 

She looked at it, but did not move either her dress or her 
hand. 

" It seems clean enough, Dick," she said, " except where 
those old cigarettes have stained your thumb and fingers. 
Now, I never smoked, and mine are quite white." 

He took the hand— uplifted now — and under pretence of 
examining it, drew her fingers to his lips and kissed them. 
Edith did not protest ; it seemed that she was in a mood to 
be made love to by Dick, who, consequently, like a good and 
experienced general, proceeded to press his advantage. 
Dropping on his knees before her — an easy movement, for 
his chair was close, and, like her own, not high — he encircled 
her with his arm, drew down her golden head and kissed her 
passionately. 
" Dick," she said, " you shouldn't do that; "' but she did not 



■Hi 

m 



•34 



Mil 



f =! 

'I 



trbc man of tfjc Spirit 



resist, nor was there anger in her voice as on a certain 
previous occasion. 

"Very well," he whispered; "kiss me once and I will 
stop. 

She drew her head back, and looked at him with her 
wonderful blue eyes that seemed to have grown strangely 

" If I kissed you, Dick, you know it would mean more than 
your kissing me," she murmured. 

" Yes, Edith ; it would mean what I want it to mean— that 
you love me and will marry me. So. dearest, kiss me and let 
us make an end after all these years." 

For a little while she continued to look at him. then she 
sighed, her breast heaved, and her eyes grew softer and more 
tender still, 

"I s-npose it must be so," she said, "for I never felt 
towards . :,y man as I do to you," and bending h.r head, 
she kissed him and gently thrust him from her. Dick 
sank back into his chair and mechanically lit anothei 
cigarette. " You soon go back to your old habits, Dick." she 
said, watching him. " No, doni throw it away, for while you 
smoke you will keep still, and I have something to say. There 
must be no word of this to anyone, Dick-not for another six 
months, at least. Do you understand ? " He nodded " It 
has come about a great deal too soon," she went on • " but 
you asked yourself to lunch-not I-and I felt lonely and 
tired c' my own thoughts. Mrs. Ullershaw's funeral upset me 
I hated it, but I had to go. Dick, I am not happy as I ought 
to be. I feel as if something were .coming between us ; no 
it has always been there, only now it is thicker and higher' 
Rupert used to talk a great, deal about the difference between 
flesh and spmt, and at the time it bored me, for I didn't under- 
stand him. But I think that I do now. I_the outward I— 
well, after what has passed-you know, Dick, it's yours, isn't 
It?. But the inner I-that which you can't admire or embrace, 



&i^' 



Tmelcome 1)ome ! 



•S5 



1 



remains as far from you as ever, and I'm not sure that it 
might not learn to hate you yet." 

" It's rather difficult to separate them, Edith ? " he answered 
unconcernedly, for these subtleties did not greatly alarm him 
who remembered that he had heard something like them 
before. " At any rate," he added, " I am quite content with 
your outward self," and he looked at her beauty admiringly, 
•' and must live in hope that the invisible rest of you will 
decide to follow its lead." 

" You are making fun of me," she said wearily. " But I 
daresay you are right for all that ; I hope so. And now go 
away, Dick. I am not accustomed to these emotions, and 
they ups5t me. Yes, you can come back in a day or two— 
on Tuesday. No, no more affection, you are smoking— 
good-bye ! " 

So Dick went triumphant, his luck was good indeed, and he 
was really happy, for he adored Edith. She was the only 
thing or creature that he did adore— except himself. 



I,-, 



1 



Once Rupert's steamer had come safe to dock, which 
happened a little after two o'clock, it took him but a short 
while to bid her farewell. Nor was the examination of his 
luggage a lengthy process, consisting as this did of nothing but 
a rough carpet-bag, in which were stuffed his Arab garments 
and a few necessaries that, like the clothes he wore, he had 
purchased from or through sailors on the ship. The official s 
who could not quite place him, for his appearance puzzled 
them, thought well to turn out the bag whereof the contents 
puzzled them still more, but as there was nothmg dutiable in 
it they were soon thrust back again. Then with some 
difficulty he found a hansom cab, and crawling into it, bade 
the man drive to his mother's house in Regent's Park, a 
journey that seemed longer to Rupert than all those days 
upon the sea. 



i36 



TTbe xrnnv of tbe SiXrft 



took hf, Sri. L '"*• '"^ '>*^'"8 P*i<i the cabman, he 
He could not see the house a, yet. for the dusk was gathering 

Idow r t? '• l^Z r "° "«^' •" t''^ drawing-room 
e4nwhe' --r^'^"'' ^''' ^^"' ^^^ ''^ remember^ that 
hlh J .? ""*'"' "^"'^ *^™^"' tf'^y did not fit close, a, 

he had often noticed when returning home at night. 

repcll^ ,t. and hobblmg up the little walk and the steos 
beyond, found the bell and rang. There was a long plul 
hetd^t "'.k'^'";' --f>ody shuffling down he pa's^Tg^ 
S h.' ^^'°°;,^'"« ""'o<=ked and the chain unhooked 
Then he grew terr.bly afraid until he remembered of a sudden 
that It was quite possible that Kdith and his mother were 
agam spendmg the New Year at Devene. Well, it would La 
^eat disappointment, but on the other hand, he wouW ha^ a 
few hours to make himself more presentable 

woIt^'rK m"""^' '"^ ^"^°'' ^^"^ ''"^ * «to"^ heavy-faced 
woman who held a greasy tin candlestick in her hand. 

an^ ^« do you want?" she said, surveying this rough figure 
Uampl ""''"''^'^ ^°"''^'""^' f°^ ^" »"'"' ran on 

"I want to see Mrs. Ullershaw," he answered, and his voice 
reassured her somewhat. 

" Mrs. Ullershaw ? Which Mrs. Ullershaw ?-for I've heard 
there was a young 'un as well as an old 'un. I ain't the 
2^ c-etaker, you know, only a friend what's took tr 

htitnVs'yoX^ ""^^ ""'"' ^^^ ^" ''' ^-"^^ ^^^^ 

UlZL^"^ "'" '''' ^"P^^^- "^ --t the old Mrs. 

" Well, then, you had better go and call on her in Bromoton 

Cemetery, for I'm told she was buried there last we^ My 

gracious! what's the matter with the man?" she Idded. for 



tRRelccme Itomci 



»37 



4 



Rupen had dropped his carpet-bag and fallen back against 
the doorway. 

" Nothing," he said faintly. " If I might have a glass of 
water?" 

She shook her fat head wisely. 

"No, you don't go to play that glass-of- water trick upon 
me. I know ; I goes to fetch it, and you prigs the things for 
which I am responsible. But you can come into this room 
and sit down if you like, if you feel queer, for I ain't afraid 
of no one-legged man;" and she opened the door of the 
dining-room. 

Rupert followed her into it and sank into his own chair, 
for the place was still furnished. Indeed, there in the frame 
of the looking-glass some of his invitation-cards remained, 
and on the sideboard stood the bronze Osiris which he had 
given to Edith. In the turmoil of his dazed mind, it brought 
back to him a memory of the crypt of the temple at Tama 
and the great statue of that same god, which presided there 
over the place of death. Well, it seemed that this also was a 
place of death. 

"When did Mrs. Ullershaw die?" he asked, with an 
effort. 

"About five days before she was buried. That's the usual 
time, ain't it ? " 

He paused, then asked again : " Do you know where the 
young Mrs. Ullershaw is ? " 

" No, I don't ; but my friend said that's her address on the 
bit of paper on the mantel-piece in case any letters came to 
forward." 

Rupert raised himself and took the paper. It was an 
envelope; that, indeed, in which his last letter to Edith 
had been posted from Abu-Simbel, and beneath her name, 
Mrs. Rupert Ullershaw, the Regent's Park address was 
scratched out, and that of the Brook Street rooms written 
instead, in his wife's own handwriting. 



238 



ITbe m«!s of tbe Spmt 






"Thank you," he said, retaining the paper; "that is all I 
wanted to know. I will go now." 

Next instant he was on the steps and heard the door being 
locked behind him. 

His cab was still standing a few yards off, as the man wished 
to breathe his horse after the long drive. Rupert re-entered it, 
and told him to go to Brook Street. There, in the cab, the first 
shock passed away, and his natural grief overcame him, causing 
the tears to course down his cheeks. It was all so dreadful 
and so sad— if only his mother had lived a Uttle longer ! 

Very soon they reached the number written on the old 
envelope, and once more Rupert, carpet-bag in hand, rang 
the bell, or rather pushed the button, for this one was electric, 
wondering in a vague way what awaited him behind fAa/ door. 
It was answered b^ a little underling, a child fresh from the 
country, for the head servant had gone for a Sunday jaunt in 
the company of Edith's own maid. 

" Is Mrs. Ullershaw in ? " asked Rupert 
"Yes, sir, I believe so," she answered, curtseying to this 
great, dim apparition, and striving to hide her dirty little 
hands under her apron. 
Rupert entered the hall, and asked which was her room. 
"Upstairs, sir, and the first door to the right;" for 
remembering the scolding she had recently received from 
Edith when she showed up Sir Somebody Something with 
her sleeves tucked above her thin elbows, as they were just 
now, the girl did not wish to repeat that unforgiveable offence. 
So having explained and shut the door, she promptly vanished. 
Still carrying his carpet-bag, Rupert climbed the stairs till 
he came to the room indicated. Placing his bag upon a 
butler's tray outside, which had not been removed since 
luncheon, he knocked. 

"Come in," said a voice— the voice of Edith, who thought 
that it was a maid with some hot water which she had forgotten 
when she brought up the tea. 



Melcome Dome! 



839 



He turned the handle and entered. Edith was standing on 
the other side of the room near the fire with her back towards 
him, for she was engaged in pouring herself out a cup of tea. 
Presently, hearing the clump dump, of his wooden crutch 
upon the floor— for he advanced towards her before speaking 
—she turned round wondering what could be causing that 
unusual noise. By the light of a standard lamp, she perceived 
a tall figure clad in a sailor's pea jacket and mustard-coloured 
trousers, who seemed to be leaning on a great rough stick, and 
to have a gigantic red beard and long, unkempt hair which 
tumbled all over his forehead. 

"Who on earth are you?" she exclaimed, "and what are 
you doing here ? " 

" Edith," he answered, in a reproachful tone, " Edith ! " 
She snatched a candle from the tea-tray, and running rather 

than walking to him, held it towards his face and looked. 

Next moment it was rolling on the floor, while she staggered 

back towards the fire. 

•'Oh, my God ! " she gasped. " Oh, my God ! is it you, or 
your ghc " 

" It is I— Rupert," he replied heavily, " no ghost. I almost 
wish I were." 

She collected herself; she stood upright. 

" You have been dead for months ; at least, they 
said that you were dead. Welcome home, Rupert!" an' 
with a kind of despairing gesture she stretched out her 
hand. 

Again he hobbled forward, again the rough-hewn thornwood 
crutch, made by himself with a pocket-knife, clumped upon the 
carpeted floor. Edith looked down at the sound, and saw that 
one leg of the mustard-coloured trousers swung loose. Then 
she looked up and perceived for certain what at first Lne had 
only half grasped, that where the left eye should have been 
was only a sunken hollow, scarlet-rimmed and inflamed with 
scars as of burning beneath it, and that the right eye also was 



240 



TTbe ma!? of tbe BpMt 



inflamed and bloodshot as though with weeping, as indeed 

was the case. 

"What has happened to you? " she asked, in a whisper, for 
she could find no voice to speak aloud, and the hand that she 
had outstretched dropped to her side. " Oh, your foot and 
eye — what has happened to them?" 

"Torture," he answered, in a kind of groan. "I fell into 
the hands of savages who mutilated me. I am sorry. I see 
it shocks you," and he stood still, leaning heavily on the 
crutch, his whole attitude one of despair with which hope still 
struggled faintly. 

If it existed, it was destined to swift doom. 

Edith made no movement, only said, pointing to a chair by 
him, the same in which Dick had smoked his cigarettes : 

*• Won't you sit down ? " 

He fell on to, rather than sat in the chair, his heavy crutch 
clattering to the floor beside him. 

"Will you have some tea?" she went on distractedly. 
" Oh, there is no other cup, take mine." 

"Thank you," he answered, waving his hand in refusal. 
" I am drinking from a cup of my own, and I find it bitter." 

For a few seconds there was silence between them, which 
she broke, for she felt that it was driving her mad. 

" Tell me," she said—" tell me— dear— " the word stuck in 
her throat and came out with a kind of gasp, "what does all 
this mean? You see I am quite ignorant I thought you 
dead ; look at my dress." 

"Only what I have told you. I am an unfortunate man, 
I was set upon by an overwhelming force. I fought as best I 
could, untU nearly all ny people were killed, but unluckily I 
was stunned and taken prisoner. Afterwards they offered me 
the choice of Islam or death. I chose death ; but they tortured 
me first, hacking off my f~ot and putting out my eye with hot 
irons, and in the end, when they were about to hang me, I was 
rescued." 



Tmelcome Domet 



341 



\ 



" Islam ? " she broke in, shivering. " What is Islam ? " 
"In other words, the Mahommedan religion, which they 
wished me to accept." 

"And you let them do— those dreadful things to you 
rather than pretend to be a Mahommedan for a few days?" 
"Of course," he answered, with a kind of sullen pride. 
" What did you expect of me, Edith ? " 

" I ? Oh, I don't know ; but it seems so terrible. Well, 
and who rescued you ? " 

" Some women in authority whom I had befriended. They 
came at the head of their tribesmen and killed the Arabs, and 
took mc to their home and nursed me back to life." 
She looked up quickly. 

"We heard about them," she said; "one was young and 
beautiful ; if a savage can be beautiful, was she not ? " 

Yes," he answered indifferently, " I suppose that Mea was 
beautiful, but she is not a savage, she is of much more ancient 
race and higher rank than ours— the lady Tama. I will tell 
you all about her some time." 

"Ah!" exclaimed Edith, "but I don't know that she 
interests me." 

"She ought to," he replied, "as she saved my life." 
Then that subject dropped. 

" Do you know," she asked, " oh ! do you know about your 
mother ? " 

" Yes, Edith, I drove to the house when I landed from the 
ship and heard. It was there I got your address, and thrusting 
his hand into the side-pocket of the pea-coat, he produced the 
crumpled envelope. " I suppose that you were with her ? " he 
added. 

" No, not at the last." 

" Who was, then ? " 

" No one except the nuue, I think. She had another stroke 
and became insensible, you know. I had left a fortnight 
before, as I could do no good and they wanted my room." 



\ 



94* 



Uhc Mas of tbe Spirit 



Now for the first time resentment began to rise in Rupert|s 
patient heart, stirred up there by the knowledge that his 
beloved mother had been left to die in utter loneliness. 

" Indeed," he said, and there was a stern ring in his voice. 
" It might have been kinder had you stayed, which, as my wife, 
it was your place to do." 

"I thought that I was no longer your wife, Rupert, only 
your widow. Also, it's not my fault, but I cannot bear 
sickness and all those horrors, I never could," and she looked 
at his mutilated form and shuddered. 

" Pray then that it may not be your lot to suffer them some 
day," he said, in the same stern voice. 

It frightened her, and she plunged into a new subject, asking : 
" Have you hepd that things have gone very badly for you ? 
First, Lord Devene has an heir, a strong and healthy boy, so 
you will not succeed." 

" I am heartily glad to hear it," he said, "may the child live 
and prosper." 

She stared at this amazing man, but finding nothing to say 
upon the point that would sound decent, went on : 

" Then you are almost disgraced, ov rather your memory is. 
They say that you caused your mission to fail by mixing 
yourself up with women." 

"I read it in the papers," he replied, "and it will not be 
necessary for me to assure you that it is a falsehood. I admit, 
however, that I made a mistake in giving escort to those two 
women, partly because they were in difficulties and implored my 
help, and partly because there are generally some women in 
such a caravan as mine pretended to be, and I believed that 
their presence would make it look more like the true thing. 
Also, I am of opinion that the sheik Ibrahim, who had an old 
grudge against me, would have attacked me whether the 
women were there or not. However this may be, my h^nds 
are clean " (it was tbe second time this day that Edith had heard 
those words, and she shivered at them), " I have done my duty 



i 



MclcomeDomet 243 

like an honest man as best I could, and if I am called upon 
to suffer in body or in mind," and he glanced at his empty 
trouser-leg, "as I am, well, it is God's will, and I must bear it." 

" How can you bear it ? " she asked, almost fiercely. " To 
be mutilated; to be made horrible to look at; to have your 
character as an officer ruined ; to know that your career is 
utterly at an end; to be beggared, and to see your prospects 
destroyed by the birth of this brat-oh, how can you bear 
all these things ? They drive me mad." 

" We have still each other," he answered sadly. 

She turned on him with a desperate gesture. She had 
never loved him, had always shrunk from him ; and now— the 
kiss of another man still tingling upon her lips— oh ! she 
loathed him— this one-eyed, hideous creature who had nothing 
left to give her but a tarnished name. She could never be his 
wife, it would kill her— and then the shame of it all, the 
triumph of the women who had been jealous of her beauty 
and her luck in marrying the distinguished heir of Lord 
Devene She could not face it, and she must make that clear 
at once. 

"No, no," she gasped. "It sounds hard, but I must tell 
you. I can't, I can't— be your wife." 

He quivered a little, then sat still as stone. 

" Why not, Edith ?" he asked, in a cold, unnatural voice. 

" Oh ! look in the glass and you will see— that horrible 
red hole, and the other all red also." 

" I was totally blind for a while, and I'm ashamed to say it, 
but grief for my mother has brought back inflammation. It 
may pass. Perhaps they can do something for my looks." 

"But they cannot give you back your foot, and I hate a 
cripple. You know I always did. Also, the thing is impossible 
now ; we should be beggars." 

" What, then, do you wish me to do?" he asked. 

"Rupert," she replied, in an intense whisper, flinging 
herself upon her knees before him, and looking up at hun 






with wild, appeaUng eyes—" Rupert, be merciful, you we dead, 
remain dead, and let me be." 

"Tell me one thing, Edith," he said. "Did you ever 

love me?" 

" No, I suppose not quite." 

"Then why did you marry me? For my position and 

prospects?" , , • . 

" Yes, to some extent ; also, I respected and admired you, 
and Lord Devene forced me to it, I don't know why." 

Again that sUght shiver went through Rupert's frame, and 
he opened his mouth to speak, then closed it. Evidently she 
did not know the facts, and why should he tell her of her 
own disgrace ; he who had no wish for vengeance ? 

" Thank you for being so plain with me," he said heavily. 
« I am glad that you have told me the truth, as I wish you 
well, and it may save you some future misery, that of being the 
wife of a man whom you find hideous and whom you never 
loved Only, for your own sake, Edith, think a minute; it is 
your last chance. Things change in this world, don't they? 
I have found that out. Well, they might change agam, and 
then you might be sorry. Also, your position as the wife 
of a man who is only supposed to be dead will, m fact, be a 
false one, since at some future time he might be found to be 

alive." , , r • 1 

" I have thought," she answered. " I must take the risks. 

You will not betray me, Rupert." 

"No," he answered, in tones of awful and withering contempt. 
« I shall not follow your example, I shall not betray you. Take 
what little is mine, by inheritance or otherwise ; it will prove to 
the worid that I am really dead. But henceforth, Edith, I hate 
you, not with a hate that desires revenge, for I remember 
that we are still man and wife, and I will never lift a finger to 
harm you any more than I will break the bond that is and 
must remain until the death of one of us. Still, I teU you 
that aU my nature and my spirit rise up against you. Did you 



I 

r 



mtlcomt "borne! 



>45 



swear to me that you loved me as much as once you said you 
did, I would not touch your beauty with my finger-tips, and 
never will I willingly speak to you again in this world or the 
next. Go your own way, Edith, as I go mine," and heaving 
himself out of the low chair, Rupert lifted his crutch from the 
ground, and leaning on it heavily, limped from the room. 

As he fumbled at the door-handle, Edith rose from her 
knees, where she had remained all this time, and running after 
him, cried : 

"Rupert!" 

He took no heed, the veil of separation had fallen between 
them, a wall of silence had been built ; she might as well have 
spoken to the air. 

She saw him lift the carpet-bag from the butler's tray, then 
down the stairs went that single, heavy footfall, and the clumping 
of the crutch. The front door opened and closed again. It 
was done. 



H 



For a while Edith remained almost fainting, then she 
roused herself, thought a little, and rang the bell. It was 
answered by the parlour-maid, who had returned. 

" Jane," she said, " when you are out in future, will you be 
so good as to tell that girl Eliza never to show a stranger up 
here again without asking if I wish to see him ? This after- 
noon she let in some kind of a madman, who brought a 
bag of smuggled silks which he wished to sell me. I could 
not get rid of him for nearly half an hour, and he has frightened 
me almost out of my wits. No ; I don't want to hear any 
more about it. Take away the things." 



II 






CHAPTER XVIII 

THE HAPPy, HAPPY LIFE 

When Rupert left the house in Brook Street, he walked on 
aimlessly down it, down Bond Street, across Piccadilly, where 
in the mist he was nearly knocked ov^r by a cab, down St. 
James' Street to Pall Mall, and along it till he came to the 
Army and Navy Club, of which he was a member. Here he 
paused in front of the portico whither he had unconsciously 
directed his steps, then remembering that. ..c was dead and 
that it would never do for him to enter there, turned round 
hurriedly and butted into a portly general under whom he had 
served, who was about to go up the steps of the club. The 
general, a choleric person, cursed him, then concluding from 
his crutch and wretchec" appearance that he was a poor, home- 
less cripple, felt ashamed of himself, and with some words of 
regret, thrust sixpence into his hand. 

" Pray don't apologise, General," said Rupert, " it was my 
awkwardness." Then he looked at the sixpence, and adding : 
" With your permission I will pass it on," he gave it to a 
hungry-looking crossing-sweepsr who waited hard by, and 
limped forward. 

The general stood amazed, for he knew the voice, but could 
not put a name to it. 

" Hi ! " he shouted, after the retreating figure, but Rupert 
reaUsing his danger, went on quickly towards the Athenaeum 
and was soon lost in the mist. 

" Devilish odd thing," said the General, as he strolled up the 
steps. " Whose voice was it ? I know— Rupert Ullershaw's 1 " 

246 



TTbe tavWt DappV Xlfe 



«47 



f 



Thm he ran to the porter's box «nd asked : " Has Colonel 
Ullershaw been in the club ? " 

" No, General," answered the porter, " he isn't a member 
now; he's dead. Killed in the Soudan, General, some months 
ago." 

"Oh, yes," said the General, "I remember. He's the 
fellow who made a mess of things. Good man too, but 
there was a woman in it. Well, hang me, if I haven't seen 
his ghost without a leg and with a beard a yard long. Can't 
mistake that voice. Heard it right across the square at Abu- 
Klea. Most astonishing thing." 

For years afterwards this meeting with the mutilated shade 
of Rupert Ullershaw was the general's favourite ghost story, 
especially in future days when certain facts came to be 
common knowledge. 

Rupert passed the Athenaeum. With some trouble, for they 
were slippery, he negotiated the steps beyond the Duke of 
York's column, then hurried on past the Horse Guards and 
the Foreign Office, till at length he reached the Embankment, 
and being very tired, sat down on a seat by the river. Before 
long a policeman came and disturbed him, asking what he 
was doing loitering there. He replied humbly enough that 
he believed it was a public place, whereon the policeman 
stared at him as the general had done, and went by. Still 
he rose and walked forward till he came to where the Bhadows 
were deep between two lamps, for here the thickening fog gave 
him privacy, and placing his bag by him, leaned upon the 
parapet and listened to the murmur of the river beneath. 

Then and there it was, now when the exertions of walking 
were done with, that the whole weight of his miseries 
struck Rupert full. His soul descended into hell; he saw 
and understood the awful truth. Wrecked bodily, ruined in 
reputation, deserted by the world, scorned as loathsome by 
Edith, Devene's daughter, who had only married him for 
what he had to give, there was no outcast in all that cruel 



148 



TCbe TPOay of tbe Spirit 



London more lonesome, more hopeless than he, who, not ten 
months before, had been one of its fSted and sought-after 
favourites. It was that day twelvemonth, New Year's Eve, 
he remembered, that he had proposed to and been accepted 
by Edith, remembered also the words spoken to him then by 
Lady Devene and his mother, of which now he felt the full 
meaning, although he had paid little attention to them at the 
time. Those women understood ; his love had blinded him. 

What was there left for him to do — who had promised to 
*' remain dead " ? The lapping of the water beneath seemed to 
shape an answer. It spoke to him as the thud of the steamer 
and the beat of the train had spoken once before, and well he 
understood its meaning. All his hopes lay buried beneath 
that water of death, and there also were his mother and many 
a good friend and comrade. Why should he not seek them ? 
Edith would be pleased, for then he would remain dead 
indeed. Yet it was a wicked act. Well, sometimes circum- 
stances outweighed scruples, and in that matter he felt as 
though he must take his chance — like Edith. If there were 
any worse place than this world in which, after all, with one 
exception, he had done his best, it must b^ bad indeed. 
Here was a deep that could have no depth ilow it, and 
therein he sojourned. 

It would be easy. The wide handles of that accursed and 
weighty bag would pass over his head, a /ery fitting brick to 
drown a dog that had had its day. He was quite alone in the 
dreary place, where no one lingered on such a night. Why 
should they, when Salvation Army shelters were available? 
He could not go there, he could not go anywhere, he would 
be found at or recognised. The Thames mud was the best 
bed for hmi who felt so very tired. 

Rupert leaned further over the parapet, nerving himself to 
the desperate deed, he who was almost mad with shame and 
sorrow. Then it was in the grey mist that lay upon the water, 
quite biding it from his sight, that be seemed to see something 



TTbe fMppy, tmpp)? Xife 



•49 



.. 



form which gradually took the ihape of a woman's face, 
surrounded by cloudy, outspread hair. He could see it 
clearly, and in it the tender, pitying eyes from which tear<i ran, 
so clearly that at once he knew it for the face of Mea, as after 
all those weeks of darkness it had first appeared to his return- 
ing sight Yes, as it had arisen then upon the blindness of 
his body with its assurance of light renewed, so did it arise 
again upon the utter blackness of his soul's despair, a beacon 
of hope in the midst of that desperatf> shipwreck, a token of 
love unchanging and unchanged above this seething bitterness 
of scorn ahd hate. 

Of a sudden, as the shadow passed, he remembered the 
promise which he had made to Mea when she earned him that 
sometimes things went amiss. He had thought it idle enough 
even then who only gave it to please her, and since that 
day it had rarely crossed his mind. Now he knew, however, 
that her true affection for him had endowed her with some 
strange foresight of the woes about to fall upon his defenceless 
head, and thereby, in a way unforeseen by herself or him, had 
provided him with a door of escape from the dreadful habita- 
tions into which his spirit was to be driven by Destiny. Mea 
would welcome back her friend who had no other friend in all 
the world ; moreover, in such an event as this he had sworn 
that he would return to her. 

Then, should he sink in that river, he would be a liar as well 
as a coward. No, the river was done with. Mea had saved 
him from this sin, at the very thought of which he felt even 
now that he would live to shiver and be ashamed. 

New life came back to Rupert, hope was born again, and its 
first manifestation was of a very material nature. He felt 
hungry who had eaten little that da^ and undergone much. 
Taking up the bag, which but a few minutes before he had 
intended to put to such a dreadful purpose, he lifted his 
crutch and made his way briskly across the Embankment, and 
along one of the side streets into the Strand. Here he found 



}| 



! 



150 



tTN VIUv of tbe Strttlt 



• modest-looking eating-house, and entering, ordered himself 
some food, for which the waiter, noting his appearance, 
demanded payment in advance. While he ate he bethought 
himself, and as a result, took up a paper that lay near by and 
began to search the advertisements. Soon he discovered what 
he wanted. On the following morning, Monday, a steamer of 
one of the smaller and less know.. lines was advertised to sail 
for Egypt and other places, leaving Liverpool at eleven o'clock 
a.m. Rupert askcv) (O. a.i A. B.C. Railway Guide, and found 
that there was a train Trom Euston about 10.30, which reached 
Liverpool in the early morning. 

This train in due course he took, and on the next day, as 
':oon as the Liverpool office was open, booked a second-class 
passage to Egypt under an assumed name. 



Mi 



l\i 



It was spring in the oasis of Tama, where the crops were 
growing fast. 

"Bakhita," said Mea suddenly one afternoon, "I grow 
weary of this place. To-morrow morning I ride down the 
Black Pass to look out at the desert beyond, which now should 
be beautiful with flowers, for heavy rains have fallen." 

" It is not flowers that you would look for in the desert, if 
indeed any can be found there," answered Bakhita, with her 
peculiar smile, and shaking her white head. " Nor shall you 
enter on to that desert where the Khalifa's man-stealing savages 
roam in bands, yelling on Allah and killing peaceable folk. 
Still, if you wish it — or if you have dreamed a dream — you can 
ride down to the mouth of the pass with a suitable escort of 
spearsmen, and stare at the desert till you are tired." 

" Bakhita, my aunt," asked Mea angrily, " who is mistress 
in this land— you or I ? " 

" Tama, my niece," answered Bakhita calmly, " where you 
are concerned, I am mistress. You set no foot in that desert. 



TCbe tt«Dra, twDin? life 



»5i 



If you try to do lo, I will order your own council of emirs to 
•hut you up. He can come to seek you if he wishes, you 
shall not go to seek him." 

"Bakhita, I spoke to you of flowers." 

*• Yes, Mea, you did ; but the flower you mean has a red 
beard ; alsc, i-j Arab has trodden on it and crushed it out of 
shape. Moreover, it grows in another land, and if it did not, 
what use would it be to your garden ? " 

'♦ I am tired of this place and wish to look at the desert," 
answered Mea. " If you trouble me much more, I will cross 
it and travel to Egypt. Even that school at Luxor is not so 
dull as Tama. Go ; do my bidding." 

Then Bakhita went, full of her own thoughts, and ordered 
the emirs to furnish an escort of a hundred spears as a devil 
had entered into their lady, and she knew not where it would 
lead her. The emirs grumbled because the crops required 
attention, and asked if the devil could not be sent away for a 
little while, but Bakhita answered them in such fashion that 
before the sun was well up on the following morning the 
hundred horsemen were in attendance. 

So they rode to the mouth of the Black Pass and camped 
there. The whole of the next day Mea star:;] i^. the desert, in 
which, after all, there proved to be f' ,. Powers ^he captains 
of the escort, who were thinking of '.; weedinr ).. 'heir crops, 
asked if they were to return on tl t ic^'o i.io r ni ig. She 
answered no, the desert air was improving hv;i ; e'lui. Next 
night they repeated their question. She . ' id no, her 
health was being completely re-established by . j desert air ; 
but if they wished, they could go home and leave her. This, 
however, they declined to do, saying that if the crops suffered, 
it was bad, but if anything happened to their lady, then they 
were disgraced men, and even their women-folk would refuse 
them. 

Another evening came on, and in the light of the setting 
sun appeared far away one solitary man riding a very tired 



«5« 



TRie WUis at tbe SipMt 






1 ! 



I! 



camel. In that vast plain from the horizon of which he emerged, 
he looked an extraordinarily lonesome object. 

"What is that man ?" asked Mea of Bakhita in a strange 
voice. 

" A Bedouin thief, I suppose, a spy of the Khalifa's. How 
should I know what he is? Bid your people go to find 
out." 

" No," answered Mea ; " we will wait and see what the thief 
does. Let the men keep hidden and be prepared to attack 
him." 

The thief or the spy continued to approach, till presently 
his camel seemed to go dead-lame, and he was obliged to halt 
in a little clump of bush about half a mile from the mouth of 
the pass. 

*' There is no 'moon, so he will have to sit there till 
morning," said Bakhita. *' Well, it will be easier to capture 
him in the dark." 

The night fell swiftly. 

" Now," said Mea, *' bring five men and let us go to take 
this spy. Anubis, come hither, little dog, we are going to take 
a spy and a lame camel, but, Anubis, do not bark, or you will 
betray us to his fury." 

So they went out through the gloom, and when they drew 
near the clump of bush, dismounted and advanced on foot, 
Mea leading the dog Anubis by a string. One of the men, 
who walked a little ahead, came back and reported that the 
spy had lit a fire and hung a kettle over it to boil ; also that 
he was seated with his back to the fire and by its light engaged 
in reading a book, which he thought a strange thing for a spy 
to do. 

Mea listened and said nothing. They were travelling up 
wind towards the stranger, and now the dog Anubis began to 
sniff the air and grow excited. Whether by design or by 
accident, Mea let one end of the fibre string by which she held 
h alip^ and away it bolted into the bush, whence presently 



JSbt tM))t»v» Ibtiwn I'tte 



«53 



i i 
i, 



arose a sound of joyous yelpings, mingled with the deep tones 
of a man's voice. 

" That dog is not angry," said Bakhita. 

Mea looked at her, a wonderful look. Then she, too, ran 
forward into the bush more quickly even than the dog had 
run. Waving back the escort, for now she was sure of the 
truth, Bakhita followed, and presently this was what she 
saw. The man in Arab dress, with a book beside him, was 
seated on the ground, while behind grazed the lame camel. 
In the man's arms, still yelping and licking every part of him 
that it could reach, was the cur-dog Anubis, whilst standing 
in the shadow, as yet unseen by the man, with that wonderful 
look still upon her face, was Mea. She advanced silently, 
like a dream or a ghost, till she stood between him and the 
fire. Feeling its heat cut off he ceased fondling the dog, and 
looked up and round trying to see who it was, for no light fell 
on her. Then . lea spoke in that rich and love-laden voice 
of hers which, to him at any rate, differed from the voice of 
any other woman — spoke in her pretty, broken English : 

•* Rupert Bey he know the nasty little dog Anubis which 
runs from his mistress to him, but the mistress Mea, ah ! he 
know her not." 

Next moment there was a great commotion. Poor Anubis 
rolled from Rupert's lap into the fire, where he burnt his tail, 
and then sat down with a yelp and licked it, his eyes still fixed 
on Rupert, who snatched his crutch and struggled from the 
ground. He was up, his arms were outstretched; then 
suddenly he seemed to remember, for he let them fall and 
with his right hand seized that of Mea and pressed it finst to 
his forehead and then to his lips. 

«' What a fool," said Bakhita to herself in the background, 
" to kiss her fingers when he might have kissed her face. I 
always thought that these white people were mad, but this 
Bey is a saint as well Poor Mea, who has fallen in love with 
a holy man. Give me a nnner, say I." 






!i 



»S4 



Ube ma^ of tbe Spirit 



Meanwhile, Mea had returned the " holy man's " compli- 
ment by kissing his fingers, but to Aerse// she said : " So the 
woman with the snow face and the FappHire eyes has only ill- 
treated him. It may be evil, but oh ! I wish that she were 
dead, for then he would not only love me, he would say it 
also." 

"You have come ! " she exclaimed, in Arabic. "Oh, my 
lord ! did I not tell you that we should meet again, and have I 
not felt you drawing near to me, and therefore taken these 
people from their gardens and sat here for three whole 
days?" 

"Yes, Tama, I have come," he answered, in a somewhat 
shaky voice. 

" Is that all you say ? » she went on, and there were doubt 
and fear in her yoice. "For how long have you come? 
Perhaps you do but sojourn for a night or for a week. Oh ! 
tell me quickly — for how long have you come ? " 

"I don't know," he answered; "it depends on you. For 
all my life, I think, if you will keep me as your servant." 

A great sigh of relief burst from Mea's breast. 

" Oh ! stop for this life and the next, too, if you will. Stop 
till the mountains melt into the desert and the Nile runs 
through Tama— that is, if I may stop with you. But what 
mean you ? How can you be my servant— you who are- 
something else ? " and she waved her hand upward. 

" Mea," he said, " I must make you understand. I— I am 
a poor man now ; I have nothing left in the world, or, at 
least, the little that I have I cannot get, because I have 
promised to be dead to the world, and if I asked for my 
money, why then, they would know that I am alive. Look ! 
that is all that I possess," and putting his hand into his pocket, 
he produced seven and a half piastres—" that, a gun, and a 
lame camel. I have had to live hard to make my money last 
from London to Tama, and, as you see, even to risk the desert 
alone. Well, I must earn my bread, and I remembered your 



1 
t 

I 






XTbc Dapps, DappB Xifc 155 

kindness, and your promise that I should be welcome, so I 
thought to myself: 'I will go back to the lady Mea, and I 
will ask her to let me manage her lands, and in return to give 
me a house to live in and some food, and perhaps if I can 
make them pay better than they do, a little percentage of the 
profits to buy myself books and clothes.' I don't know if you 
think I am asking too much," he added humbly. 

"No," answered Mea, " I do not think that you are asking 
too much, who might have had more; but we will strike 
hands upon our bargain afterwards. Meanwhile— my servant 
—I engage you for life, and as a luck-penny will you give me 
some of that dinner which you are cooking in the pot, for I am 
hungry ? No," she added, " I forget ; it is I should give the 
luck-penny, and Anubis, whom you love better, shall have 
your dinner." 

Then she clapped her hands, and the five men advanced 
out of the darkness, looking curiously at Rupert. She turned 
upon them fiercely. 

" Are you stones of the desert or palms of the wood," she 
cried, "that you stand so still? Down, dogs, and make 
obeisance to your lord, who has come back to rule you ! " 

They did not hesitate or wait to be told again, for some- 
thing in Tama's eye informed them that prompt obedience 
was best. Nor, indeed, did they grudge him fealty, for 
Rupert was loved by all of them as the great man and the 
bra- e who had saved their lady's life or honour. Flat they 
went upon the sand, and in spite of his protests laid their 
hands upon his foot and did him homage in the Eastern 
style. 

"It is enough," said Mea. "Back, one of you, to the 
camp, and bring my mare for my lord to ride, and bid the 
emir turn out his men to greet him." 

A man went like an arrow, while the others retreated to see 
about the sick camel, and to lead it into camp. 

" Mea, Mea," said Rupert reproachfully, "you are putting me 






156 TTbe XSHa^ of tbe Si>irit 

in a very false position. I am nothing but a broken wanderer, 
and out of seven piastres what gift can I give these men whom 
you force to do obeisance to me as though I were a sultan? 

"You can give them the best of gifts, the gift you have 
given me, that of your presence. Let us understand one 
another, Rupert Bey. You may call yourself my servant if 
you will, I do not quarrel with the word, for lack of a better. 
But with me you are my people's lord, since, but for you, I 
should not be here among them." ^^ 

"How can it be?" he mattered, "since I may not ask— 
and the look upon his face told her the rest 

Her hand shook a Uttle. "She still lives?" she said, 
glancing at him. 

He nodded. * . . i a » 

" And you still hold yourself bound to her and her alone? 

"Yes, Mea, by my law and my oath, neither of which may 

be broken." . 

She drew nearer and looked up into his fece. " Do you still 

love her, Rupert?" 
" No," he said shortly. " She has behaved cruelly to me ; 

she is quite dead to me." 

" Ah ! And do you love any other woman ? " 

The great head drooped forward. " Yes, Mea." 

" So ! Now what is her name ? " 

Rupert looked about him like a man who seeks escape from 
dangers and finds none. Then he answered : 

"Her name is yours— yours and no other's. But oh! 
have pity on my weakness. Remember that this lonely 
path is hard; do not drive me back into the wilderness. 

She let her head fall a little, and when she lifted it again he 
saw by the light of the fire and of the bright stars above, that 
her sweet face shone with a great and abiding joy. 

"Have no fear, Rupert." she said. " Is my own path so 
easy that I should wish to plant thorns in jouxsj }"^Z . 
content ; I teU you that I am weU content. This is the best 



Zhc Dappi?, Dapps Xif c 



257 



and happiest hour of my life; it shines bright above me 
as that star. I understand that you are great and noble, 
who being a man that loves, yet deny your heart Shall I 
then not deny my heart also, or shall I seek to tarnish 
your honour in your own eyes? Nay, may I perish 
first, or— worse still— be parted from you. What was our 
compact ? That we should be as brother and sister, having 
withal the love of a hundred husbands and the love of a 
hundred wives. It stands, and it shall stand, nor will I grow 
bitter or unkind. Only I fear me, Rupert, that as my beauty 
wanes, you who are tied to me but by the spirit, you who do 
not see me re-arise in children, may weary of this jealous, 
half-wild daughter of the desert— for jealous I know I still 
shall be." 

Now it was his turn to say "Fear not, Mea, fear not; 
broken body and broken spirit have come home together, 
have come home to you like a swallow in the spring, and 
they will seek no other nest." 

" In the name of God, so be it," she said. 
" In the name of God, so it is," he answered. 
This, then, was their marriage, there amidst the desert 
sands and beneath the desert stars, which they felt even then 
were less eternal than the iroth they plighted ; as it proved 
the strangest and yet the happiest and most blessed marria 
that ever was celebrated between man and woman — or so they 
came to think. 

For are we not perchance befooled and blind? Driven by 
impulses that we did not create, but which are necessary to our 
-reation, we follow after the flesh, and therefrom often garner 
bitterness, who, were our eyes opened, should pursue the 
spirit and win a more abiding joy which it alone can give. 
Yet perhaps it was not decreed that this should be so ; perhaps 
in its day, for ends whereof we know nothing, the flesh was 
meant to be our master, to rule us, as the spirit shall rule 
in its appointed kingdom. Who can say? 



358 



Vbe TPOap of tbe Spirit 



At least, this is certain; these two escaped to the 
borderland of that kingdom, though not without difficulty, 
backward looks, and struggling. There, before the time, they 
dwelt together in such content and satisfaction as are known 
to few, gazing forward, ever gazing forward, to the day when, 
as they believed, they should enter hand-in-hand upon an 
heritage glorious and eternal, and from the bitter seed of self- 
denial, planted in pain and watered with secret tears, should 
reap such a golden harvest and wreathe themselves with such 
white, immortal flowers as the rich soil of passion cannot bear, 
nor can the flesh hope to equal with its reward of fading, evil- 
odoured poppies. 

For in that cruellest hour of his life, that hour of bereave-^ 
ment, of spittmgs and of scourgings, when he looked with 
longing at the grey waters of the river, and they showed 
him Mea's face, though he did not know it then, was bom 
the pure happiness which Rupert had lived to reach. 
Never was Edith so kind to him as in that last act of 
utter faithlessness, for at her side all that was best in him 
must have withered, all that was weak and worldly must have 
increased. She took from him herself, but she gave him Mea. 
She deprived him of the worid in which he was bred, with its 
false glitter and falser civilisation, its venomous strivings for 
victory bought with the heart's blood of those that fall, its 
mad lust for rank and wealth and precedence to be won by any 
means and kept as best they might, till, like broken toys. Time 
swept them and their holders to its dust-heap. But in place 
of these she gave him the wilderness and its beaconing stars ; 
she gave him what all of us so sorely need, time to reflect 
upon the eternal verities of our being, time to repent his sins 
before he was called upon to give account of them. Yes, 
when Edith took from him the fever of the earth, she gave to 
him a foretaste of the peace that passeth understanding. 

Rupert was led to the camp in the mouth of the Black 



f 



We Dappi?, Dappi? xifc 259 

Pass, and there received with waving of Unces, with shoutings 
and with honour; very different greetings, he could not help 
reflecting, to those that had awaited him in his native city on 
the Thames, which is so mighty and multitudinous that kings 
may pass and leave it untroubled; the city where even the 
most distinguished human item hardly counts. That night he 
ate with Mea and Bakhita, and after the latter had gone to 
see about the setting of his tent, he told Mea all his story 
from the beginning, keeping nothing back, not even his first 
fault as a lad, for he felt that the confidence between them 
should be complete. She listened in silence, till he rame to 
the tale of all he had suffered upon that awful Sunday in 
London, and of how his wife had rejected him, praying him 
to " remain dead." Then Mea's indignation broke out. 

"I ought to give her thanks," she said; "yet here we 
should kill that woman. Say now, Rupert Bey, had this 
other man you tell of, your cousin, had he been with 
her ? " 

"How can I know?" answered Rupert. "But it is true 
that a glove such as he used to wear lay upon the table, 
and a man had been smoking in the room that day." 

"I thought as much," she answered, "for otherwise she 
had spoken to you differently; although, of course, you were 
no longer rich and great, and with such women that changes 
the face of things/' *^ 

" My wife would not disgrace herself," said Rupert proudly 

"Your wife had no husband then-you were a dead man " 
she answered. * 

"Yes; dead as I am now." 

" Dead as you are— who live for me." 

At this point Bakhita, who had been waiting outside for 
two hours in the cold, entered and remarked sarcastically that 
Ruperts tent was ready. He took the hint at once and 
retired. The old lady watched him go, then turned to Mea 
and said : 



a6o 



myt Wtps of tbe Spirit 



" Well, niece, what have you settled? " 

Mea told her, whereon the grim Bakhita burst into a great 
laugh. 

" Strange children you are indeed, both of you," she said. 
"Yet who shall say there is no wisdom in your childishness, 
who have learned that there are other things beyond this 
passing show? At the least, you seem happy in it — for the 
present." 

" I am happy for the present, for the future, and forever," 
answered Mea. 

" Then that is well, though it would seem that the old line 
must die with you, unless you change your mind and, after all, 
marry some other man." 

*' I marry no otl^er man, Bakhita." 

" So be it. Why should not the old line die ? Everything 
has an end, like the gods of Egypt. If it were not so, new 
things could not begin. It does not matter so long as you are 
happy. But though you have found a new faith, laugh no 
more at my ancient magic, Mea. Did not the sinking boat 
sail back to your arms that night ? " 

« It sailed back, Bakhita, and when it sails forth i^ain mine 
sails with it. I laugh at nothing. Old faiths and new, they are 
all shadows of the truth — for those who believe in them, 
Bakhita." 



Oil ! happy, happy was the life that begpn for these two this 
night Soon Rupert was installed in a little he e not far 
&om Mea's, and the wide, neglected lands were us care. 
He worV'^d early and late, and made them to blosso. like the 
rose, so that wealth began to flow into the oasis of Tama. 
Then in the evenings when the work was done, he «ind Mea 
would eat together, and talk together, and read and study 
together, and together daily grow more changed and wise. 
But at an appointed hour they shook each other by the 



TTbe fMppy, Dapps Xite 



a6i 



hand and separated, and on the morrow that blessed, peaceful 
round began again. 

He was her world, her life, the very altar of her faith, 
whence the pure incense of her heart went up in ceaseless 
sacrifice to Heaven. She was his love, his light, his star- 
all this yet unattained— as stars must be. 



i 



r 



CHAPTER XIX 



AFTER SEVBM YEARS 




On the Tuesday after his Sunday luncheon with Edith, Dick 
called at the Brook Street rooms as arranged, this time for 
afternoon tea. He found Edith gloomy and upset, not at all 
in a mood indeed to respond to his demonstrations of affection. 
He asked her what was the matter, but could get no satisfactory 
answer out of her, knd so at last went away in disgust, reflecting 
that of all women whom he had known, Edith was the most 
uncertain and bewildering. 

Thus things went on for some time, interviews being 
alternated with letters sufficiently compromising in their 
allusions to what had passed between them, until, when 
actually forced into a comer, Edith informed him that her 
change of conduct was owing to a dream that she had 
dreamed in which she saw Rupert alive and well. Of course 
Dick laughed at her dream, but still she made it serve her 
turn for quite another three months. Then at length there 
came a day when he would be put off no longer. 

The six months of silence for which she had stipulated were, 
he pointed out, more than gone by, and he proposed, therefore, 
to announce their engagement in the usual fashion. 

"You must not," she said, springing up; "I forbid you. 
If you do so I will contradict it, and never speak to you 
again." 

Now, exasperated beyond endurance, Dick's evil temper 

broke out Even to Edith it was a revelation, for she had never 

seen him in such a rage before. He swore at her; he called 

262 



after Se\>en ]t^ear0 



a63 



her names which she had not been accustomed to hear ; he 
said that she was a bad woman who, having married UUershaw 
for his rank and prospects, was now trying to break his — 
Dick's — heart for fun ; that she had been the curse of his 
existence, and he hoped that it would all come back upon her 
own head, and so forth. 

Edith, as a rule, was perfectly able to look after herself, but 
on this occasion the man's violence was too much for her 
who had never before been exposed to rough abuse. She grew 
frightened, and in her fear blurted out the tru^h. 

" I can't marry you," she said, " and perhaps it is as well, as 
I don't wish to put up with this sort of thing." 

" Curse it all ! Why not ? " he asked. * Are you ill, or are 
you going into a nunnery ? " 

She turned round upon him. 

" No ; for a better reason than either. Because a woman 
can't have two husbands. Rupert is alive." 

Dick's rage vanished, his jaw fell and his face went white. 
•* How do you know that ? " he asked. 

" Because I have seen him here. He came not much more 
than an hour after you had left that Sunday, on the 31st 
of December." 

" You mean your dream," he said. 

" No, I mean Rupert in flesh and blood, with his foot cut 
off and his eye burnt out." 

" Then where is he now ? " asked Dick, looking round as 
though he expected to see him emerge from behind the 
curtain. 

" I don't know, I haven't an idea. He may ' in England, 
or he may be in Egypt, or he may be at the bottom of the sea. 
We — don't correspond." 

'• I think you had better tell me all the truth if you can," 
said Dick grimly. '* It will be best for both of us." 



So she did, 
word. Dick's 



repeating their conversation almost word for 
imagination was vivid, and easily pictured the 



a64 



TTbe muv or tbe Sptm 



•cene there in the place of its enactment He law the wretched, 
cnppled man dragging himself away upon his crutch out into 
the cold London night, away anywhere from the cruel woman 
whom he had married in love and faith. It touched his pity, 
he even felt remorseful for his share in the business. 

"Poor devil 1" he said aloud. "And, as an inducement 
to him to 'remain dead,' did you tell him that you bad just 
engaged yourself to another man ? " 

"No," she said furiously; "I told him nothing of the sort. 
I could not bear the sight of him all mutilated like that; it 
made me sick. Besides," she went on, "what had he to 
offer? His reputation was gone, and so have the rank and 
fortune which I expected." 

"That's frank; but he is scarcely responsible, is he?" 
answered Dick dril>. " You see, poor Rupert was always an 
awful fool. It is even conceivable that he may have believed 
that you married him for himself. Really, it is a funny story. 
But I say, Edith, has it occurred to you, being the kind of 
man he is, what an utter devil he must think you?" 

"I don't care what he thinks," she said wildly. "The 
whole conditions are changed, and I could not be expected to 
live with him as my husband; indeed, we should havenothina 
to live on." • 

"You think you don't care now, but perhaps you will some 
day," sneered Dick. •.« Well, what's the game ? Am I to keep 
this dark?" ^ 

" I think you had better for your own sake," she answered, 
and added meaningly : "With Rupert dead, and dead I am 
sure he will remain, there is only one child's life between you 
and an inheritance of a million of money, or its worth. But 
with him alive, it is another matter, so perhaps you will do 
well not to resurrect him." 

" Perhaps I shall," said Dick. "By Jove I Edith, you are 
a cool hand, ' and he looked at her, not without admiration. 
" And now please teU me exactly what our relations are to 






li 






After Seven Wcnte ^6$ 

be in the future? As I don't want to be ou up with a 
bigamy case— for fellows like that have an • '<-> . . trick of 
reappearing— marriage seems out of Aie quest ui. ,: .jsn't it?" 
"Absolutely!" answered Edith. 
"Then might I ask what is in tht^ question ?" 
"Nothing at all," replied Edith firmly. "Don't suppose 
for one moment that I am going to be involved in any 
wretched irregularity with its inevitable end." 
" Whafs the inevitable end, my dear ? " 
"Where men liko you are concerned, desertion and 
exposure, I imagine. ' 

"You are not c-ajplimentary today, Edith, though perhaps 
you are right. Thcie iiok-ani corner businesses always finish 
in misery j very often in mutuo ' cei.:sti= ' i .)n. But now, just see 
what a mess you have made by tr) ing to get everything. You 
married Rupert, whom you cordially dislik.jd, and won't stick 
to him because somebody has cit off his k)Ot and Devene has 
got an heir. You engaged yourself to me, who, up to f'..; 
present, at any rate, you cordially liked, and now you •• ;.: t 
stick to me, not from any motives of high morality, whir \ n.> 
might respect, but for fear of the consequences. So it ^ :ft»n ; 
that there is only one person to whom you will stick, an : tli^t 
is your precious self. Well, I wish you joy of the choic 
Edith, but speaking as a candid friend, I don't personally 
know anyone who has held better cards and thrown them 
under the table. Now the table is left, that is all, a nice, 
hard, polished table, and you can look in it at the reflection of 
your own pretty face till you grow tired. There is one thing, 
I shan't be jealous, because what applies to me will apply to 
any other man. As your own husband is not good enough 
for yoti, you will have to do without the lot of us, though 
whether you will have cause to be jealous of me is another 
matter. Do you see the point, dearest ? " 

" Do you see the door, Dick ? " she answered, pointing 
towards it. 



a66 



Ube TROas of tbe Spirit 



"Very well done," he said, mocking her, "quite in our local 
leading lady's best tragedy manner. But I forgot, you have 
had practice lately with poor old Rupert. Well, I will follow 
his example. GkK)d-day, Edith ! " and with a most polite bow 
he went. 

To say that he left Edith in a rage would be to put the 
matter too mildly, for his bitter slings and arrows had worked 
her into such a fury that she could only find relief in 
tears. 

"If it hadn't been for him," she reflected to herself, when 
she recovered a little, " I don't think I should have turned 
Rupert away like that, and this is my reward. And what's 
more, I believe that I have been a fool. After all, Rupert is 
a gentleman and Dick — isn't. Those doctors are so clever 
that they might have mended him up and made him look 
respectable ; the official business could have been explained, 
for I am certain he did nothing he shouldn't do, and perhaps 
he may still be Lord Devene in the end. Whereas, what am 
I now ? A young widow who -'".ren't marry again, and who 
must starve for the rest of her ,^, upon a thousand a year. 
Why should I be so cruely treated ? Fate must have a grudge 
against me. It is too bad, too bad, and as for Dick, I hate 
him worse than Rupert." 

So she said and thought, yet during the years that followed, 
at any rate outwardly, this pair made it up, after a fashion, as 
they always did. To her determination to be involved in 
nothing compromising, Edith remained quite firm, although 
Dick, in his r61e of a man of the world, did his, best to shake 
her scruples whenever he saw an opportunity, arguing that 
Rupert must be really dead, and that it would even be safe 
for them to marry. These, however, were, as it chanced, 
greatly strengthened by Dick himself, who, as time went on, 
progressively disimproved. 

To begin with, his good looks, which were so striking in his 
youth, entirely left him. He grew fat, and as is not uncommon 



i'^f 



V 



1 



after Set>cn Ji^cara 267 

with those in whom the southern blood is strong, who sit up 
late at night, drink more than is good for them, and in general 
live fast, Dick acquired also an appearance that is best 
described as "greasy." His rich colour departed, leaving 
his cheeks tallow-like in hue, whereas beneath the eyes that 
used to be so fine and eloquent appeared deep, black lines, 
while his wavy, chestnut-coloured hair became quite dark, and 
on the top of his head melted into baldness. In short, within 
seven years of the conversation recorded above, Dick was 
nothing more than a middle-aged gentleman of somewhat 
unpleasing aspect, who no longer appealed in the slightest to 
Edith's aesthetic tastes. Moreover, now again his reputation 
was as seedy as his looks, for to those first-class companies of 
which he was a director, in his desire for money to satisfy his 
extravagant mode of life, he had added others of a more 
doubtful character, his connection with one of which landed 
him in a scandal, whence he only escaped by the help of 
Lord Devene. The House, too, to which he still belonged 
had discovered that there was nothing in him after all, and 
left him to sink to the level of an undistinguished private 
member. Lastly, his health was far from good, and he had 
been warned by the doctors that unless he entirely altered 
his way of life, the liver attacks from which he suffered might 
develop into something very serious. Meanwhile, they did not 
improve his temper. 



More than seven years had gone by since that New Year's 
Eve on which Rupert, rejected by Edith, wiped the mud of 
London off his feet for ever, when the terrible blow fell on 
Lord Devene which crushed out the last sparks of his proud 
and bitter spirit. Of a sudden, his only child— for no others 
were bom to him— the bright and beautiful boy whom he 
idolised, was seized by some sickness of the brain, which, in 
spite of all that skill could do for him, carried him off withm a 
week. Thus it came about that once more Rupert, who was 



ir 



^^%5i 



a68 



tTbe m&^ or tbe Spirit 



I 

i 

I 



supposed to be dead, was left heir-presmnptive to the Devene 
title and settled ptoxtexty. 

The mother accepted her loss with characteristic patience 
and courage. She had never expected that the boy would live, 
and was not surprised at his decease. But such a blow as this 
was more than Lord Devene could bear. Here his philosophy 
failed him, and he had no other comfort to which to fly. 
Moreover, now, the title would become extinct, and so much of 
the property as he could not leave away must pass into the 
worthless hands of Dick Learmer. Under these circumstances, 
his thoughts turned once more to his natural daughter. Edith. 
He even sent for Dick, and much as he demised and hated the 
man, suggested that he should marry her, of course without 
telling him his real reason. 

"It is time yoii settled yourself in Ufe, if ever you are 
going to do so," he said, "and the same remark appUes to 
Edith, who must have had enough of being a widow. You 
will be a rich man when I am gone, and in this pure and 
virtuous land it would be easy enough to purchase the re- 
creation of the title. A matter of ^^50,000 judiciously spent 
on the Party will do that in a year or so — even for you. 
What do you say ? " 

" Only that I have been trying to marry Edith for the last 
seven years and she won't have me," answered Dick. 

" Why not ? I thought she was so fond of you." 

" Used to be, you mean. I don't think she is now." 

" Ah ! she may have heard of your way of life, you know, 
as many other people have; but perhajw your new pro- 
spects" — and he winced as he said the wordt- "may make a 
difference." 

" I doubt it," said Dick. " She \uu got a craze in her head ; 
believes that Rupert may still be living." 

Lord Devene looked at him so sharply that next moment he 
was sorry he had spoken the words. 

" That's a very odd craze, Dick," he said, " after so many 



I ,!, 



after Seven l^ars 



969 



years. I should not have thought Edith was a woman given 
to such fancies. I suggest that you should try to disabuse her. 
See what you can do, and we will talk over the matter again 
Now good-bye; I'm tired." 

When the door closed behind Dick, Lord Devene began to 
piece together in his own mind certain rumours that had 
reached him of late, but been forgotten under pressure of his 
great grief. For instance, he had read in a paper a paragraph 
about some white man, said to have been an officer whose 
death was reported long ago, who in reality wss still living in 
a desert oasis which he ruled. Now, was it possible that this 
white man could be Rupert ? Was it possible that the letter 
which he had sent him on the day of his marriage informing 
him of his wife's true parenuge had so upset hir;i that he 
determined never to return to her? It was very improbable 
—but still— it might be worth while making a few inquiries. 

He ordered his brougham ai»d drove down to a club where 
he often met Lord Southwick at thin hour of the day. As it 
chanced, in the smoking-room, which was otherwise quite 
deserted, he was the first man whom he saw. They had not 
spoken together since the death of bjs son, and Lord 
Southwick took the opportunity to offer mme condolences. 

" Don't speak of it, my dear fellow." answered Devene , "it 
is very kind of you, but I can't bear the subject. All my 
hopes were centred on that boy, and there's an end. Had 
UUershaw still been living now, it would have been some 
consolation, but I suppose that he must be dead too." 
"Why do you say 'tuppose'?" asked Lord Southwick 

" Wdf, if you want to know, because of certain fancies 
tha* h«y« c:ome into my head. Now tell me, have you 
heard aftytbing?" 

"Yes, I have, and I was going to speak to you on the 
matter. Some queer things have come to my knowledge 
Utely. Pirst of all, we have found out that all that yarn 



li 



! n 



370 



TTbe Mas of tDe SpiHt 



with which Dick Learmer stuffed up my late chief is non- 
sense, for that Egyptian sergeant, Abdullah, was mortally 
wounded a few months ago, and before he died made a 
confession that he had told lies, and that he ran away at the very 
beginning of the fight between UUershaw and those Arab rascals. 
So, of course, he didn't see him killed as he said he did." 

" Oh ! But what yarn of Learmer's do you mean ? " 

"Why, that UUershaw had taken up with some pretty 
native woman and was travelling with her. Learmer gave 
us to understand that he had private confirmation of the fact, 
and, perhaps foolishly, we believed him, and that's what made 
my old chief so wild with your cousin. Now it appears from 
Abdullah's statement, which has just been forwarded home, as 
they say out there, ' to clear the shadow that has fallen upon 
the reputation of a very gallant officer,' all that UUershaw did 
was to give escort to two helpless females across the desert, 
partly from charity and partly because he thought that their 
presence would make his caravan look more like a trading 
expedition." 

" I see," said Lord Devene; but to himself he added: " Dick 
again ! What a cowardly, black - hearted scoundrel ! Well, 
is there any m«:e?" 

"Yes. You may remember it was stated in Parliament 
that this abortive expedition had cost the authorities about 
;^2,ooo. Well, within the last year, ;^3,ooo have been paid 
into the Treasury from a source that we cannot trace, accom- 
panied by a rather involved written message to this effect : 
•That the money was to be appUed to reimburse the costs 
incurred in the diplomatic mission to certain chiefs on the 
borders of the Soudan, in the fitting out and providing with 
funds of the expedition under the command of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Rupert UUershaw, C.B., by a person who desires to 
clear away the reproach that had been laid upon him of 
having been the cause of a waste of public money.' Now did 
you, or his widow, do this ? " 



r 



after Sewn ©ears 



1 



271 

"Most certainly not ! " answered Lord Devene, with a touch 
of h.s old sarcasm. " Are either of us people likely to rep^y 
to Government money to which they have no legal cUim ? 
How did the cash come ? " 

"Through a bank that would only say that it had 
been received from its branch in Egypt. Further reports 
have reached us that the Tama oasisf which no 'onThas 
visited for generations, is now virtually ruled by a white 

Trell ch%"J' '' ''" '"" ^ ^"^'^^ officer althouh 
K 1 i if '' * '^°'"*"- ^^^^ ^°'"*". ^ho is called 

recently put herself m communication with the Egyptian 
Government, demanding to be accorded its protectST nS 

cfrnMT '""' ''" '''^ ^^^^^ °^ '^^'«"- -^-' 

certain that it was never written by an Arab woman, so a 
pohtical officer was sent to see into the matter. He got to 
the oasis, and found that it is a perfect garden, and very rich 
having of late established an enormous trade in date7 salt 
ho^es. etc.. with the surrounding tribes.' Of the white'man.' 
however he saw nothing, his questions on the point beS 
politely Ignored. Still he did hear by side winds fhat such f 

rrrr- r^' '^ ^" ' -" ^^" y- ^^out the thinTbu 

T^^ 7° n^ ^°"' ""^^^ *° ^°"°^ 't "P- I hope you will 

ndeed. and still more, that Ullershaw may prove to be airve 

In my opinion, he has been a cruelly-treated man. and i is 

just possible that a fellow of his character, knowing this and 

not caring to defend himself, has chosen to remain fost " 

Thank you, I will." said Lord Devene, and going home 
he wrote a note to Edith telling her to come to see him. 



gpHBi 



CHAPTER XX 



i 



REVELATIONS 

S:^rl:"ke;"h„"Ln,. When . ^^ she 
S?«ri.e she «« shocked at the change in h„ app«».nc.. 

. "ru tWnk that I look iU ? » he said, readmg her m.nd. 

.. V« I Ss. «, that I do, Courin George," she answer^ 
„ she lontempUted his snow-white hair, shrunken fignre, «.d 

ftta «.ce worn -*r"-jfj~^rng. Three«ore «.d 

«' Well, you see, I am no longer yuuug. 
ten are tie full years of man, and I have just completed them 
But tWs no^ the worst of it ; the old sleeplessness ,s back upon 
But tnai 8 nuv lu scarcelv closed my eyes for six 

"■•rht" rrJ b,.l LT^y'poor bo/has finish^! 
2 "nd low I don't care how quickly I foUow him into the 
S^kTthe Ine, the better, I think; yes, the sooner the 

•^^Don't say that," said Edith gently. " I hope that you have 

' -ir^forn: m»lrnr;lrhaps weeks," he added slowly. 

.. My «^mffl is nearly finished, the accur^ wheel .s gomg 

J „ B„i » he went on swiftly, as thought to prevent her 

to stop. But, hf" «»' ° ' ,„ ,j,k about your 

T"'"'. 2. wTJyJnoJn,^ Dick UarmerF" 
•"^r™sid« hil /desirable n«n for a woman to 

rr^oTLTt"^ 8one all to bHs of late, and he 






WevclatloiiB ,^3 

d^'t exactly give off an odour of sanctity, does he ? In 

I^h^W T ^"PP^'^"^ *''•" '"^'^ «' '^^ for many year^ 
LI «,,^ ?*'.*'" "'^ "'^"^ " b'« ^ blackguard J yoS 
could find ,n London, and I have always wondered ho^ Z 
could care twopence about him." ' 

''And yet you suggest that I should marry him." 

«.8ht as well have your share. But I understand that you 

"N^" said Edith decidedly, "I won't. He did fascinate 

^^h I Ld '""°"k ^°" "' ''''"^^ •" ^^^^ matters-only I 
wish I had seen the truth earlier." 

f. '7^. '\^° ^' " ^°" '^'*' t^'^»P5 yo" would have gone 
to Egypt when you thought fit to stay at home. WeHf vou 
won^ commit bigamy, which I admif is an awkw Jdl' ^ 
do, why not make it up with Rupert ? " ^ 

Edith gasped and sank back in her chair 

" Ho !" said this wise old man, drawing his while eyebrows 

"What else do you call it when ie got him sent off .„ 

Sn'lnf r''"" .""' "^" ^ Pa^cuJyTan^: 
mission, and when, on the failure of that mission »m) tZ 
reported death, ,fe even look the oppormniH " is^' .f 
mind, of his chiefs and so blacken hi. meX"*^ "" 

Certainly; I mil give you chapter and verse for it if yon 
like. But about Rupert... He p.„«d, ,„d drew a Ca'a 
venture. .. What happened when you saw himf " 

So D,ck »as told you,', she said. •• Well, if he win Be 






Zbc THUS ot tbe Spitit 



«74 

about one thing, he will lie about another. But why force me 
to repeat the story?" 

"Because I should like to hear it first-hand. What 

happened, and when ? " , ,. n ♦ 

" Over seven years ago," answered Edith hoarsely, Rupert 
came back, on New Year's Eve, a Sunday, after Dick had been 
to lunch. He was dressed in horrible rough clothes, and his 
hair was long and tangled like that of a wild man. His foot 
had been cut oflF, and his left eye put out by those savagM 
there in the Soudan. They tortured him because he would 
not become a Mahommedan," . . *u- 

«Ah'" said Lord Devene, "personally I thmk that the 
Mahommedan religion has points, but-plucky fellow^ Rupert; 
it mieht have recpmmended him to some women. Well f 

« Well, he was horrible to me. As a friend I could scarcely 
have borne him, but as a husband-oh ! you know." 

•• I think you said that Dick had been to luncheon, did you 
not? Now. had he ^icrhaps suggested himself as what on a 
Board of Directors is called an alternative? " 

«« He had asked me to marry him." replied Edith, dropping 

^'^ With the usual concomitants. I suppose, and perhaps had 
not been too roughly rebuffed. He was better-looklng then 
wasn't he? Well, under the circumstances, no doitbr, a mere 
martyr in badly fitting clothes, and without a foot, would have 
seemed horrible to any refined young woman. Husbands 
often assume that appearance to wives who chance to ha^e 
followed their finer instincts, and fallen m love with somebody 
else But what became of our martyr? Is he now preaching 
Christianity among the benighted Mahommedans ? 
«. You are cruel to me." said Edith, with something like a sob. 
"Then learn patience from the example of the martyr, who 
seems to have suffered much without complaining, for con- 
science' sake-like you, dear Edith, and-answer the quesUon 
« I told him," she said, in a low voice, " that as he was dead. 



. 



Kevclattoiw ,75 

iL?^***' !rT'" ^^' "" '^"^ ""^y ^ <io»'t know 

« Vr*"^ "' °' ""^"^^^^^ ^^ ^» »*^^« o' not-" 

Then allow me to reassure your anxious heart upon that 

riiitn -?* "^^'^ ^"P^'* " ** P^^**"* ^i^'ng in an oasis 
canted Tama, somewhere in the desert, not far from the 
Soudan ; I don t know the exact locality, but doubtless it can 
easily be ascerUined. Moreover, he has prospered better 
than most martyrs do, for with characteristic folly, he has 
paid back ^,,000, which he did not owe. to the Government 
in 3ome particularly stupid and roundabout feshion. By the 
way, you never claimed his insurance, did you ? No Well 
that's lucky, for you might have been prosecuted. To return' 
-m th,s happy oasis, as I believe. Rupert lives at ease, assist- 
mg Its fair ruler to govern some primitive community, who 
J^parently grow dates and manufacture salt for his and her 

»„« ' .f°'. ^^n '^"' *° ^*^^ '"'"'^^^ ^' '^on principles 
sufficiently to allow himself to contract a morganatic marriage 

of which, under the circumstances, you will be the last to 
complain." 

"I don't believe it," said Edith, with some energy. "If* 
not like Rupert to break his word." 

"It would be like a born idiot if he didn' Why should 
you have a monopoly in that respect ? " Lord Devene answered, 
with withering sarcasm. "But perhaps the best thing to do 
would be to go and find out. Look here, Edith!" he said 
droppmg his bitter, bantering tone, "I have never set up for 
virtue; I hate the name of it as it is commonly used, but I 
must tell you that I think you an exceedingly wicked woman 
What business have you to treat the man whom you had 
married m this way, just because you had been philandering 
with that accursed Dick, and because he had lost his leg and 
his prospects of a title? Well, his leg won't grow again, but 
the title is sprouting finely. Hadn't you better make haste 
and secure it? Lady Devene sounds better than Mrs. 






-J 



176 



Ubc THUS Of tbe Spirit 



Ullenhaw, relict of a forgotten colonel in the Egyptian 
army. AUo, perhaps you would be happier ai the wife 
of an honourable man than as the friend of Dick Learmer." 

•• I'm not his friend," replied Edith indignantly, "—now after 
what you have told me, for it was base to try to blacken 
the reputation of a dead man. Also, I don't like him at 
all ; his ways of life and even his appearance disgust me." 

" I am glad to hear it," said Lord Devene. 

" As for your reproaches about poor Rupert," she went on, 
«» you find it convenient to forget that it was you who forced 
me into that marriage. I never pretended to be in love with 
him, although it is true that now, when I am older, I see 
things in a different light, and have more regard for him than 
ever I had before." 

•« Now, when you have escaped from the blighting shadow 
of the other man's influence, you mean, Edith. But, whatever 
the reason, better late than not at all. You blame me for 
having, by a gift of ;^2S,ooo, etc., 'forced' yu into the 
marriage. Well, would you like to know why I did so?" 

"Yes; I should very much." 

•• Then I see no reason why I should not tell you— now. 
It was because you happen to be my daughter, Edith." 

She gasped again, then said : " Is that the truth, or one of 
your bad jokes ? " 

" The truth. I would rather not enter on the subject with 
you, but you can have your mother's statement to read after- 
wards, if you like, and I don't know that the fact need distress 

you." 

"It distresses me very much," answered Edith bitterly. 
"Hitherto I always thought that my mother was honest, 
and that my father was a good if a foolish man. Now those 
illusions have gone, like the rest, and now, too, I understand 
where all that is bad in me came from, and that my odd dislike 
of Rupert was inherited— for I have heard that story from 
Dick." 



t 

f 



•It would ««m, my d«r Edith," h. „,d, "Uat jour 
power, of offMsive .p«ch „. „ ,„„ ; .j^"^' 7"/ 

"i W you back in your own coin, that is ,|i. For an 
hour you have „t there mocking and insulting me. ,„!ZZ 

toTar :;:7r °" "^^'-^^^ "<• -* .h. i„f„r^f,i:„' 

'.^.iaer^t J,Z,ou° i^lTf'h'- "■;-• '^' ' 
n,e to addre,. you i^'ST/ C"' st' ^t t '^i^ 

about It, for at any rate, as I think you once said, he was the 
only ,«pectabl. man in the family, and he might hZ elt 
aggrieved under all the ciiCTmstonces " 

letter'wLh^hl'f'"?'"''" ""' "' *"• "^ y" "^^^ a 
etter which the footman gave to him at the train when he was 

starting for Egypt after your marriage ? Yes? Wia Zl 
letter informed him of our exact ..laHonship, Sring '11 
w,^ h,m to pass on the facts to you. or nol as hefiw" 
. He never said a word," exclaimed Edith. "No not 
even m that scene when we parted, and he might " eaTi"^ 

ur^irbt-l'.tjen^T'" """ -'■ «^' ^''' *^~ 
" Quite so and that is why I wished you to marry him. Also 
then as now he was going to get the title and the p^o^r y and 
unnatural creature though you think me to bef I ZTlsit 

InS'T h' ""' T''"" ^'°">^ ^'^-^ those emp^tlte" 
Indeed I have ,t still, and that is why I desire and im^ore ha 

you should make it up with Rupert if he is still living ^s en 

Eduhr he went on earnestly, "you are still a biutifutd 

admir«i woman, but you are now well past your youth Zd 

friends, and can't marry anyone else to protect and look afS 



l ili-Jlc 



MICROCCN>Y RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 





1^ y£ 



us 
u 



2.2 



13^ 

14.0 mil 2.0 



i 

Hi 
Ifllll 



1.8 




^ /IPPLIED HVMGE Inc 

^K 1653 East Main Street 

S'.S Rochester. New York 14609 USA 

'-Sa (716) *82 - 0300 - Phone 

^£ (716) 288- 5989 -Fax 



TTbc msus of tbc Sptttt 



378 

vou So I suggest that for your own sake you should take 
refuge with a husband in whom you yourself admit that there 
is much to esteem. Edith, my days are almost done; it is 
very probable that I shall have no further opportunity of 
talking to you upon this or any other subject. I urge you 
therefore as one who. being responsible for yo- P-sence in 
the world, has your welfare most earnestly at he^rt,jo promise 
me that you will make inquiries, and if you find that Ruper 
is living, as I believe, that you will go to him for he wil 
certainly not come to you. and ask his pardon for the past. 

.. ™i!!:i^:k?o." she answered slowly. •« and yet, after all that 

has been-oh ! how can I ? And how will he revive me ? 

.. I am not sur^," answered Lord Devene. " Were I in his 
place. I know how I should receive you." he added, with a 
grim little laugh ; "but Rupert is a forbeanng creature The 
Trouble is that he may have formed other ties. AH I ^n 
suggest is that you should be patient and try to work upon 

his feelings and sense of duty. Now ^ ^^-^^f.^Vr You 
shall say no more who have other things to think of. You 
have made your own bed, Edith, and if you can t re-make it, 
you must He on it as it is, that's all. Good-bye ! 

She rose and held out her hand. ,. , , • e 

"Before you go." he said, with a nervous little cleanng of 
the throat, "-it .eems weak I know, but I should like to hear 
you say that you forgive me, not about the Rupert business 
for there I am sure I did the best I could for you, but for 
bringing you into this world at all. So far, I admit whoever's 
the fauV may be. you do not seem to have made a grea^ 
success of it. any more than I have. As you know J[ *™ 
troubled by no form of the common superstitions of our age, 
holding as I do that we are the purest accidents, born like 
gnats from the life-creating influences of sun and air and 
moisture, developed out of matter and P^«"g^\^f° 
matter.to live again as matter, whereof our intellect .8 but a 



> 



lRet>eIat<on0 



279 



manifestation, and no more. Still I cannot help acknow- 
ledging, after many years of observation, that there does 
seem to be some kind of fate which influences the affairs 
of men, and at times brings retribution on them for their 
follies and mistakes. If that is so, Edith, it is this fate which 
you should blame," and the old man looked at her almost 
appealingly. 

" No," she answered, in a cold voice. " Once I remember, 
when I did not know that you were my father, I told you that 
I loved you— I suppose that the kinship of our blood prompted 
me. Now when I know how close that kinship is, and in what 
way it came about, by the disgrace of my mother during the 
life-time of her husband, I love you no more. It is not the 
fate that I blame, but you, you— its instrument, who were free to 
choose the better part." 

"So be it," replied Lord Devene quietly. "Apply those 
words to your own life, Edith, and by them let it be judged as 
you have judged me." 

Then they parted. 



Edith kept her promise. Going to a great lawyer, famous 
for his investigations of difficult matters, she told him merely 
that rumours had reached her to the effect that her husband, 
who for many years had been supposed to be dead, was in 
reality alive in the Soudan, or in its bordering desert, and 
suggested that he should put himself in communication with 
Lord Southwick and the Egyptian authorities with the object 
of ascertaining the truth, and if necessary send someone out 
to Egypt. The lawyer made notes, said that the .-natter should 
be followed up, and that he would keep her advised as ^o the 
results of his inquiries. Thereupon Edith, who, after their 
last bitter and tragic interview, did not wish to see anything 
more at present of the man whom she must believe to be her 
father, left town, as indeed it was her custom to do during the 






28o 



TTbe Mai? of tbe Spftit 



month of August, and went away to Scotland. When she 
had been there nearly six weeks, she received one morning a 
telegram from Lady Devene, which was dated from Grosvenor 
Square and read : 



" Come here at once. Your Cousin George is no more, 
want your help." 



I 



Shocked by this news she managed to catch the midday 
train to London. At Rugby she saw the placard of an 
evening paper. On it, among other news' hct^dings, was 
printed : " Sad death of a well-known peer." She bought 
the paper, and after some search found a short paragraph 

which said : 

» 

*' We regret to announce that Lord Devene was found dead 
in bed at his house in Grosvenor Square this morning. The 
cause of his death is not yet known." Then followed some 
biographical details and these words : " As Lord Devene lost 
his only son some months ago, it is believed that the peerage 
becomes extinct. The settled property, however, passes to his 
cousin, Richard Learmer, Esq., M.P." 

From the station Edith drove direct to Grosvenor Square 
and was received by Tabitha in the drawing-room. There 
she sat in her black dress, sad-faced, calm, importing, like an 
incarnation, Edith thought, of that fate whereof her father had 
spoken to her at their last interview. They embraced each 
other without warmth, for at heart these two women were not 
friends. 

" How did it happen ? " asked Edith. 

" He died as her first ladyship died," answered the widow, 
"by an overdose of chloral. You know he could never 
sleep." 

•• How did he come to take an overdose ? " asked Edith 
again. 



i 



1Ret>elatfon0 



a8i 



" I do not know," she answered meaningly ; " perhaps the 
doctors they can tell you. Would you like to see him ? " 
"No," said Edith, with a shudder; "I had rather not." 
" Ach !" said Lady Devene, "I forgot; you did always run 
away from the sick and fear the dead ; it is your nature." 

"Are you sorry?" said Edith curiously, perhaps to change 
the conversation. 

" Yes ; for his soul which goes to its reward I am sorry, for 
he did not repent before he died, who had many things of 
which he should repent. For myself I am not sorry, for I 
have done my duty by him, and now at last the chains do 
fall off my neck and God has set me free to give me time to 
make my peace with Him before I die also." 

Then saying that she must get some food, Edith left her, for 
she did not wish to pursue this painful conversation. 

If the doctors of whom Lady Devene had spoken suspected 
anything unusual, they were singularly reticent upon the point. 
All they could or would say was that Lord Devene, who for 
many years had been in the habit of taking chloral to combat 
his constitutional sleeplessness, had on this particular night 
taken too much. So the usual verdict was returned : " Death 
from misadventure, the cause being an overdose of chloral," 
and many comments were made on the curious fact that 
Lord Devene and his first wife should have come to a 
precisely similar end. 

The will, which had been executed after the death of the 
little boy, was found to be very short. It made no mention 
of the entailed property, leaving the next heir to establish his 
claim, and after stating that the testator's wife was provided 
for by settlement, appointed Edith Ullershaw residuary legatee 
without restrictions. This sounded simple enough, but when 
matters came to be looked into it was found that Edith took 
real and personal estate to the value of ;^2oo,ooo. Subject 
to the life-interest of the widow, even the house in Grosvenor 
Square was hers, so she was now a rich woman. 



''li 



m 



^jj^pi^mi^jjjisaBi 



38a 



TTbe msiv of tbe Spirit 



"Ach! my dear Edith," said Lady Devene, when she 
learned that she had a right to continue to live in the great 
mansion, " take it, take it at once. I hate the place. Two 
thousand pounds a year, that is plenty for me — ;^Soo 
to live on, and ;^i,5oo to give away Yes, at last 
the poor shall get some of all those monies which have 
been collected out of their toil and their drink-vices." 

Needless to . the exultant Dick swooped upon the settled 
property like a famished hawk, demanding to be declared its 
rightful possessor. But then arose a most unpleasant hitch, 
for just at this time there came a letter to Edith from her 
lawyers, announcing that they had received telegraphic advices 
from the agent whom they had despatched to Egypt, informing 
them that it appeared to be almost certain that the white man 
who was living irt the oasis Tama was none other than that 
Colonel Rupert Ullershaw who was supposed to have been 
killed many years before. The lawyer added that, on their own 
responsibility, and on behalf of her husband, whom they 
believed to be alive and the present Lord Devene, they had 
made representations in the proper quarter, as a result of which 
no one would be allowed to touch the settled property unti' the 
matter was thoroughly investigated. 

Of course all this strange story soon found its way into the 
newspapers, and many were the rapturous congratulations 
which Edith received, even from persons with whom she had 
the very smallest acquaintance. Meanwhile the lawyers had 
again been in communication with their agent, who was 
established at Wady-Halfa. A second telegram was received 
from this capable and enterprising person, announcing that 
with great difficulty he had succeeded in reaching the oasis, 
and in sending a message to Colonel Ullershaw, informing him 
of his accession to the title, adding, however, that all his 
lordship had replied was, that he did not want the title, and 
refused to leave the place. 

'* It would appear," went on their letter to Edith, covering 



1. 



I 



IRtvclaUons 



283 



this cable, " that his lordship has suffered somewhat mentally 
from long confinement among these savages, who, we are 
informed, have cut off his foot to prevent his escaping, as they 
regard him as a god who has brought them great prosperity 
which would vanish if he left them. We presume, therefore, 
that your ladyship will proceed to Egypt as soon as possible 
and use your personal influence to withdraw him from his 
unhappy situation. We are informed that the i eople of the 
oasis are peaceable, but, if necessary, that the authorities will 
give you any assistance which may be required." 

Now the whole thing was out, and became a subject of 
general conversation at a hundred dinner tables. Moreover, 
it was rumoured that some years before Rupert Ullershaw had 
actually been seen in London. General Sir Alfred Alltalk 
declared that he had met him upon the steps of the Army and 
Navy Club, and a further ill-natured tale was whispered that he 
had come to see his wife, who would have nothing to do with 
him, because at that time he had ceased to be heir to the 
peerage. This story, which Edith was not wrong in ascribing 
to the indiscreet or malicious utterances of Dick, who was 
furious with disappointment and thirsting for revenge, soon 
reached her ears. Of course she contradicted it, but equally 
of course she had now no alternative but to go to Egypt. 

"Ach!" said the Dowager Lady Devene, when Edith 
expatiated to her upon the hardship and dangers of the 
journey which she must undertake alone—" ach ! if that is all, 
I will come with you as a companion. I am net afraid, and I 
have always wished to see the land where Pharaoh oppressed 
the Israelites. We will start next week, and in a month I hope 
to see my dear Rupert again— almost as much as you do," she 
added, looking at Edith sideways. 

Now as this speech was made oefore several other people, 
Edith had no choice but to acquiesce, and indeed it had 
come to this — she also wished to see Rupert. Even in her 
somewhat flinty heart remorse had been at work of late years; 



^1 



V 



MliH 



284 



TCbe MWB of tbe Spirit 



also, she had wearied of her lonely life, and wished to put a 
stop to the scandals that were floating about concerning her, 
which, as she foresaw, would soon culminate in her being 
exposed to much annoyance from Dick. In fact, he was 
already threatening to blackmail her and making unpleasant 
remarks as to certain indiscreet letters that she had 
written to him after Rupert's visit to London, in which that 
visit and other matters showing the extreme intimacy which 
existed between them were alluded to not too obscurely. 
So she arranged to depart for the East, accsmpanied by Lady 
Devene. 

Before they sailed, she received a packet from the late 
Lord Devene's bankers, which, they stated by the mouth of a 
confidential clerk, they had been directed to deliver to her 
one month after *his death, and not before. On opening it 
she found that it contained that statement concerning herself 
made by her mother, to which Ijotd Devene had alluded. 
Also, there were two letters from him, one addressed to her 
and the other to Rupert, the latter being left open that she 
might read it. 

That to herself was brief, and ran : 



" I have given you all I can. Accept this wealth as a make- 
weight to the initial wrong I did to you by becoming your 
father. I was weak enough to hope that when I revealed 
that fact to you, you would show some affection towards a 
lonely and broken-hearted man. You, however, took another 
view, irritated perhaps by our previous somewhat acrimonious 
conversation. I grieve to say that on such argumentative 
occasions I have nevt been quite able to master my torgue, 
and as you remarked, you seem to have inherited the weakness. 
At least I have not cared to expose myself to a second rebuff. 
I do not blame you, but it is true that I'rom that day forward 
I made up my mind to end an existence which has become 
hateful to me. If its dregs could have been sweetened by the 



) 






IRtvelations 



»85 



love of one who is, after all, my child, I should probably have 
been content to endure its physical and mental miseries whilst 
awaitmg their natural termination. But it has been destined 
otherwise, so like some of those old komans whom I so much 
admire, my day done, I go from this hated scene out into the 
utter darkness whence I came. Good-bye! May you be 
happier than your father, «• D » 



It was a horrible letter for a daughter to receive from the 
author of her being, but fortunately it did not affect Edith so 
much as would have been the case with many women. She 
felt that there was a certain injustice about the thing. To 
begin with, her father had taken her at her word after the in- 
comprehensible male habit. Then she had spoken when utterly 
irritated, first by his bitter gibes and sarcasms, and secondly 
by being suddenly informed that she was quite another person 
than she had supposed herself to be for over thirty years. 
Still, now when it was too late, she felt grieved. It was generally 
Edith's lot to be grieved— too late. Yes, she was grieved, no 
more, when others might have been paralysed with horror and 
unavailing remorse. 

Afterwards, she took out of its envelope and read the letter 
to Rupert. Here it is : 



" Dear Devene,— For I give you the name which will be 
yours when you read this, if you siiould ever do so. 

" I h?ve learned all your story, or if not all of it, at least 
enough to show me how accurate was the estimate which I 
formed of you long ago. Had not fortune fought against - ou, 
you would have been a great man, if such a creature really 
exists, which I doubt, since in nine hundred and ninety-nine 
cases out of a thousand, 'great' is only a popular translation 
of the vulgar word * successful' 
" I write now to express the sincere hope that if, as I believe, 



F 



286 



trbc Mas ot tbe Sptrtt 



you are still living, you and Edith, forgetting your 
diversities, and many another trouble and sorrow, will a^ -^ to 
live together in the accustomed, time-hallowed fashion, a .d it 
possible leave children behind you to carry on the race. Not 
that it is worth carrying on, except, perhaps, for certain qualities 
of your own, but one must make sacrifices upon the altars of 
habit and sentiment. For what other possible reason can the 
populations of the earth be continued ? Yet there is one- 
Nature— (perhaps in ti.e wilderness you have found out what 
that word means)— commands what the good sense of her most 
cultivated children condemns as en.irely useless and un- 
desirable. Perhips there is some ultimate object in this, 
though personally I can see none. To me it appears to be 
nothing more than a part of the blind brutality of things which 
decrees the continuance, at any rate for a little while, of the 
highly nervous, overbred and unsatisfactory animal called Man. 
Well, soon or late he will die of his own sufferings, that increase 
daily as he advances in the scale of progressive degeneracy, 
which he dignifies by the name of civilisation. Then perhaps 
Nature ^God'is your name <"or it) will enjoy a good laugh over 
the whole affair, but as human tears will have ceased ' - fall, 
what will that matter? 

•• Edith will tell you of the fashion of my end ; how, wow 
out at length by grief— one of the worst gifts of the said 
civilisation, for the savage feels little— and bodily wei kness— 
the worst gift oi our primeval state, I have determinec' to put 
an end to both, though this is a fact which there is no need 
for you to blazon abroad. 

" I can see you solemnly lifting your eyes and saying : ' Lo ! 
a judgment. What the man drove that unfortunate woman 
to has fallen back upon his own head. (Under the circum- 
stances "unfortunate" is the exact word that you will use, 
tempered by a romantic sigh, whereas, in fact, poor Clara was 
but a very ordinary and middle-class kind of sianer, who did 
not even shrink from the ruin of the boy whom she pretended 



i 



Kcpelations as? 

to love.) H^w wonderful is the retribution of Providence! 
The same death, the same means of death ! ' 

" Well, you will be quite wrong. Whether one suffers from 
sleeplessness or "orr the fear of intolerable exposure does not 
matter. One takes the most convenient method to end it, 
and m th.s.ase they h.appen to be identical. There is no 
Providence, no poetic jusfce about the b asincss. nothing but 
what novelists, or rather their critics, call the 'long Arm of 
comcidence.' 

" Good-bye I I wonder what you have been doing all these 
years m the Soudan. I should like to hear the story from 
you; I am sure that it must be interesting. But I am quite 
conr need that I shall never have the chance. Nothing is 
absolutely certain except the absolute nothingness that awaits 
US all-Believe me, my dear Devene, yours more sincerely 
than you may think, •'Devene." 

"What an odd letter," thought Edith, as she returned the 
sheets to their envelope. "I don', quite understand all 
of It, but I thmk that under other circumstances my father 
might have been a very different man. I wonder if we are 
quite responsible foi what we do, or if the circumstances are 
responsible ? If so, who makes the circumstances ? " 



h i 



CHAPTER XXI 



I ! 



! i 



1 i 

! i 



i i 



ZAHED 

Rupert was disturbed in his mind. No one was less 
superstitious. He had advanced spiritually beyond the reach 
of superstition. He had grasped the great fact still not under- 
stood by the vast majority of human beings, that the universe 
and their connection with it is a mighty mystery whereof nine 
hundred and ninety-nine parts out of a thousand are still 
veiled to men. These are api to believe, as Lord Devene 
believed, that this thousandth part which they see bathed in 
the vivid, daily sunlight is all that there is to see. They 
imagine that because only one tiny angle of the great jewel 
catches and reflects the light, the rest must be dark and value- 
less They look upon the point of rock showing above the 
ocean and forget that in its "-ecre' ..epths lies hid a mountain 
range, an island, a continen., a world, perhaps, whereof this 
topmost peak alone appears. 

With Rupert, to whom such reflections were familiar, it was 
not so. Yet perhaps, because be remembered that every 
outward manifestation, however trivial, doubtless has its root 
in some hidden reason, and that probably the thing we call 
coincidence does not in truth exist, it did trouble and even 
alarm him when, riding one morning with Mea down a deep 
cleft in Tama, he heard upon the cliff, to the right of them, 
the wild and piercing music of the Wandering Players. Look- 
ing up, he saw upon the edge of that cliff those strange 
musicians, swathed as before in such a fashion that their faces 
were invisible, three of them blowing on their pipes and two 

288 



! i 

i : 



Znbtb 



389 



keeping time with the d..m.. for the benefit, apparently, of 
the b.rd. ot Che «,r nd the beasts of the earth, si.ce no JUd 
was near to them. *^ 

He hailed them angrily from he valley. l,ut they took not 
the slightest notice, only blew more weirdly and beat the 
louder He tr.ed to get up to them, but discovered that in 
order to do so he must le round for five miles. This he 
accomplished at last, only to find that they were gone, havir 
probably slipped down the slope of the mountain away into 
their home the desert. Indeed, it was reported to him 
afterwards thai me people, accompanied by two donkeys, had 
been seen in the distance tramping across the sand. 

"Whyare you so vexed. Rupert?" asked Mea. when they 
descended the cliffs again, afte- their fruitless search 

" I don't know." he answered, with a laugh. '« but that music 
18 associated with disagreeab' recollections in my mind. The 
first time we heard it. you .member, was just before I lost 
iny foot and eye, and ^he next time was as I embarked upon 
the ship on my way to England, an unhapp- journey. What 
nave they come for now. I wonder?" 

" I don't know," she answered, with her sw smile • " but I 
at least have no cause to fear them. After their first visit I 
saved you ; after their second you came back to me." 
"And after their third—? " asked Rupert. 
"After their third I have said, I do not know; but perhaps 
It means that we shall take a long journey together." 

" If that's all, I don't care," he replied. " What I dread is 
our taking journeys away from each other." 

"I thank you," she answered, bowing to him gravely, "your 
words are pleasant to me, and I bless those musicians who 
made you speak them, as I am sure that our roads branch 
no more." 

So, still smiling at each other like two happy children, they 
rode on. They visited the salt works which Rupert had 
esubhshed to the enormous benefit of everyone in the oasis. 

T 



ill 



i 



I !! 



390 Ubc Was ot tbc Sptcit 

Passing through groves of young date-palms that he had 
planted, they came to the breeding grounds of camels, mules, 
and horses, the last of which had attained a great reputation, 
and having inspected the studs, turned back through the 
irrigated lands that now each year produced two crops mstead 

of one. . , ,, . 

"You have done well for us, Rupert," said Mea, as they 
headed homewards. "Tama has not been so wealthy smce 
the days of my forefathers, who called themselves kings, and 
now mat the Khalifa is broken and the land has become safe, 
this is but a beginning of riches." 

"I don't know about that," he answered, with his jolly 
laugh, « but 1 4iave done very well for myself. Do you know 
that out of my percentage I have saved more money than I 
can spend? Now I am going to build a hospital and hire 
a skilled man to attend to it, for I am tired of playing 

doctor." , . . r 1 

"Yes," she answered, "I have thought of it before, only 
I said nothing because it means bringing white folk into the 
place, and we are so happy without them. Also, our people 
do not like strangers." 

•I understand," he answered; "but the Europeans have 
discovered us already. It is impossible to keep them out now 
that we pay taxes to the Government. You remember that 
man a few months ago who came to tell me that I am Lord 
Devene, and that since I became so my wife is making 
inquiries about me. I would not see him, and you sent him 
away, but he, or others, will be back again soon." 

"And then will you wish to leave with him, Rupert, and 
take your own place in the West? " she asked anxiously. 

"Not I," he answered, "not if they offered to make me a 

king." 

"Well, why should you?" Mea said, with her sweet little 
laugh, "who are already a king here," and she touched her 
breast; "and there," and she nodded towards some people 



1 1 



i 



Zabcb ,,, 

who bowed themselves before him; "and ererywhere," and 

she waved her hand at the oasis of Tama in general. 

"Well." he answered, " the first is the only crown I want." 

Then having no more words to say. this strange pair. 

divorced for the kingdom of Heaven's sake, yet wedded 

mdeed, if ever man and woman have been, for truly their 

very souls were one, looked at each other tenderly. They 

had changed somewhat since we saw them last over seven 

Sr M ''■ 7*"''' ''T^' "^' ^"^ ''^' ''' '^^^ "P°« them 
both Mea's face was thinner, the rich, full lips had a little 

wistful droop; the great, pleading eyes had grown spiritual, as 
though with continual looking over the edge of the world- 
the air of mystery which her features always wore had 
deepened ; also, her figure was somewhat less rounded than it 
appeared m those unregenerate days when she turned herself 
about before Rupert, and assured him that she was "not so 
bad. Yet she was more beautiful now than then, only the 
beauty was of a different character. 

lnot"^'TK°" '^l °'''"' ^""^' ^^^ ^'^'^y ''"Proved -in 
looks. The eye that remained to him was quite bright and 
clear, and the flesh had healed over the other in such a 
fashion that it only looked as if it were shut. The scars left 
by the hot irons on his face had almost vanished also. The 
bleaching of the sun, combined with other causes, had turned 
his hair from red to an iron grey, to the great gain of his 
appearance; moreover, the wide, rough beard, which had 
caused Edith mentally to compare him to Orson as pictured in 
the fairy books of her youth, was kept short, square, and care- 
fully tnmmed. Lastly, his face, like Mea's, had fined down, till 
It resembled that of a powerful ascetic, which, in truth, he was. 
Indeed although they were so strangely different, they had yet 
grown like to one another; seen in certain lights, and in their 
Arab robes, it would have been quite possible to mistake them 
for brother and sister, as their people called them among 



at a tCbe Wai? of tbe Spirit 

For a long while, to these simple inhabitants of the desert, 
the relations between the two had been a matter of mystery. 
They were unable to understand why a man and woman, 
who were evidently everything to each other, did not 
marry. At first they thought that Rupert must have taken 
other wives among the women of the place, but finding that this 
was not so, secretly they applied to Bakhita to enlighten them. 
She informed them that because of vows that they had made, 
and for the welfare of their souls, this pair had agreed to adopt 
the doctrine of Renunciation. 

Bakhita spoke with some hidden sarcasm, but as that 
doctrine, at any rate in theory, is, and for thousands of years 
has been familiar to the East, her questioners grasped the 
sense of the saying readily enough, and on the strength of it 
gave Rupert a new name. Thenceforth among them he was 
known as Zahed, which means the Renouncer— one who, 
fixing his eyes upon a better, thrusts aside the good things 
of this world. It is easy for a man who stands upon such 
a pedestal to be lifted a little higher, at any rate amongst 
Easterns. Therefore it came about that very shortly Rupert 
found himself revered as a saint, a holy personage, who was 
probably inspired by Heaven. 

As he had no vices that could be discovered ; as he neither 
drank spirituous liquors nor even smoked, having given up 
that habit ; as he lived very simply, and gave largely to the 
poor; as he was noted for the great cures he worked by his 
doctoring; as he dispensed justice with an even hand, and by 
his hard work and ability turned the place into an Eden flowing 
with milk and honey ; and lastly, as his military knowledge and 
skill in fortification made the oasis practically impregnable to 
attack, this reputation of his grew with a rapidity that was 
positively alarming. Had he wished it, it would have been 
easy for Rupert to assume the character of a Mahdi, and to 
collect the surrounding tribes under his banner to wage what- 
ever wars he thought desirable. Needless to say, he had no 



I 



tnbc^ 



a93 



yearnings in that direction, being quite sufficiently occupied in 
doing all the good that lay to his hand in Tama. 

Still, as he found that he was expected to address the people 
upon certain feast days, generally once a month, he took the 
opportunity, without mentioning its name, to preach his own 
faith to them, or at any rate the morals which that faith 
inculcates, with the result that after he had dwelt among them 
for five years, although they knew it not, the population of 
Tama, being Coptic by blood and therefore already inclined in 
that direction, was in many essentials Christian in thought and 
character. This was a great work for one man to do in so 
short a time, and as he looked around upon the result of the 
labours of his hand and heart, Rupert in secret was conscious 
of a certain pride. He felt that his misfortunes had worked 
together for good to others as well as to himself. He felt that 
he had not lived in vain, and that when he died, the seed which 
he had sown would bear fruit a hundredfold. Happy is the 
man who can know as much as this, and few there are that 
know it. 

It was the day of the new moon, and, according to custom, 
Rupert was engaged in delivering his monthly address. There 
had been trouble in Tama. A man who had met with mis- 
fortunes after great prosperity had publicly cursed all gods 
and committed suicide ; while another man, cruelly wronged, 
had taken the law into his own hands, and murdered his 
neighbour. On these sad examples Rupert discoursed. 

Rupert and Mea, placed on this occasion upon the platform 
in the hall of the ancient temple, where they were in the habit 
of sitting side by side to administer justice, and for other 
public purposes, did not, as it happened, know of the approach 
of a party of white travellers that afternoon. It had been 
reported to them, indeed, that some Europeans— two women 
and a man, with their servants— were journeying across the 
desert, but as they did not understand that these wished to 
come to Tama, Mea contented herself with giving orders that 



394 



Tlbe TPQlai? o! tbe Spirit 



they should receive any food or assistance that they needed, 
and let the matter slip from her mind. 

Her servants and the guards of the Black Pass executed this 
command in a liberal spirit, and when the party, through an 
intc. oreter, explained that they wished to visit the oasis, having 
business with its sheik, presuming that they were expected, 
they offered no objection, but even conducted them on their 
way. Only the guards asked whom they meant by the sheik, 
Zahed, or the lady Tama ? as Zahed himself was not in the 
habit of receiving strangers. They inquired who Zahed might 
be, and were informed of the meaning of his name, also that he 
was a holy man, and a great hakim or doctor, and by birth an 
Englishman, who had been sent by Heaven to bless their 
people, and wh'o was the " lord of the spirit " of their lady 
Mea. 

Edith, from her high perch on the top of a tall camel, an 
animal which she feared and loathed, looked down at Lady 
Devene, who, composed as usual, but with her fair skin burnt 
to the colour of mahogany, sat upon a donkey as upright and 
as unmoved as though that animal were her own drawing-room 
chair. Indeed, when it fell down, as it did occasionally, she 
still sat there, waiting till someone lifted it up again. Tabitha 
was an excellent traveller ; nothing disturbed her nerves. Still 
she preferred a donkey to a camel ; it was nearer the ground, 
she explained. So, for the matter of that, did Edith, only she 
selected the latter beast because she thought, and rightly, that 
on it she looked less absurd. 

" Tabitha," she said, " what on earth do you make of all 
that? Rupert seems to have turned prophet, and to be 
married to this woman." 

" I should not wonder," answered Lady Devene, looking up 
at the graceful figure on the camel. " He is good stuff to 
make a prophet of, but as for being married, they said only 
that he is lord of the lady's spirit. Also, they call him the 
Renouncer, so I do not think that he is married." 



2abe& 



895 



Edith, who had gathered that this lady was still young and 
very good-looking, shook her head gloomily, for already she 
who had so little right to be so was jealous of Mea. 

"I expect that only means she has made him renounce 
some other ones," she suggested. " Of course, it would seem 
wonderful to all these creatures if a man had only one wife." 

" Ach ! we shall see, but at any rate you cannot grumble. 
It is a matter for his own conscience, not for you who turned 
the poor man out of doors. Ach ! Edith, you must have the 
heart of a nether millstone. But if you want to know more, 
tell that wretched Dick to find out. He stopped back to 
drink some whisky and soda." 

Edith opened her white umbrella, although at the moment 
the sun did not reach her in the pass, and interposed it 
between Tabitha and herself to indicate that the conversation 
was finis' wd. She did not appreciate I^dy Devene's out- 
spoken criticism, of which she had endured more than enough 
during the past six weeks. Nor did she wish to summon 
Dick to her assistance, for she knew exactly what he would say. 
Here it may be explained that Dick had not been asked to 
be a member of this party, but when they embarked on the 
steamer at Marseilles, they found him there. On being 
questioned as to the reason of his presence, he stated quite 
cleariy that his interests were too much concerned in the 
result of their investigations to allow of his being absent from 
them. So as they could not prevent him, with them he came, 
accompanied by a little retinue of his own. 

For the rest of that journey, when she was not stifled by the 
Campsine wind, which followed them up the pass, or thinking 
about the joltings of the camel, and other kindred discomforts, 
Edith remained lost in her own meditations. Rupert was 
here, of this there could be no manner of doubt, and con- 
sidering the fashion of their last adieux, what on earth was 
she to say to him when they met? Also, and this was more 
to the point, what would he say to her ? She was still a very 



39^ 



TTbe Mai? of tbe Spirit 



pretty woman, and his wife ; those were her only cards ; but 
whether Rupert would respond when she played them 
remained more than doubtful. His last words to her were 
that he hated her, that all his nature and his soul rose up in 
repugnance against her ; that even if she swore she loved him, 
he would not touch her with his finger-tips, and that he would 
never willingly speak to her again in this world or the next. 
This was fairly uncompromising, and was it likely that Rupert, 
that patient, obstinate Rupert, who here, it seemed, was 
adored by everybody, would of a sudden vary a determination 
in which he had persisted for more than seven years? 
Heartily did Edith wish that she had never come upon this 
wild errand. ' 

But she had been forced into it. Dick, whom she now 
cordially detested and feared, but who unfortunately knew her 
secrets, had put stories about concerning her which made it 
necessary for her to act if she would save her own good repute. 
Rich as she was and beautiful as she was, very few respectable 
people would have anything to do with her in future, if it 
became known as a certain fact that she had rejected her own 
husband when he rose from the dead, merely because he was 
in trouble, had been physically injured, and for the time lost 
his prosr^cts of a peerage. This woulf^ be too much even for 
a false and nypocritical world. But oh I she wished that she 
could be conveyed to the other end of the earth, even if she 
had to go there through the Campsine, and on this horrible, 
groaning camel. 

Their road took a turn, and before them they saw the ruins 
of a temple, and behind it a prosperous-looking Eastern town 
surrounded by groves of palms and other trees. Through 
these they rode till the^ came to the surrounding brick wall of 
the temple, where the interpreter told them that the guide said 
they must dismount, because Zahed was speaking, and the 
people would beat them if they disturbed him. 
So they obeyed, and the two of them, accompanied by the 



7 



interpreter and Dick, who ha J now arrived, were led through a 
door in the temple wall into a side chapel, which about half- 
way down its length opened out of the great hypostyle hall 
that was still filled with columns, whereof most were standing. 
At the mouth of this chapel, in the deep shadow behind a 
fallen column, whence they could see without being seen, they 
were told to stand still, and did so, as yet quite unnoticed. 
The sight before them was indeed remarkable. 

All that great hall was crowded with hundreds of men, 
women, and children, rather light in colour, and of a high-bred 
Arab stamp of feature ; clad, everyone of them, in clean and 
flowing robes, the men wearing keffiehs or head-dresses of 
various colours, whereof the ends hung upon their shoulders, 
and the women, whose faces were exposed, wimple-like hoods. 
On a platform raised upon some broken columns at the end 
of the hall were two figures, those of a man and a woman, 
between whom sat a grey-snouted little dcg, who looked in 
their direction and snaried until the man reproved it. 

With a kind of sudden pain, Edith recognised at the first 
glance that this woman was extraordinarily beautiful, althou;?h 
in a fashion that was new to her. The waving hair, uncovr d 
by any veil, but retained in place by the only emblem of er 
ancient royalty which Mea still used, a band of dull gold 
whence, above her brow, rose the uraeus, or hooded snake, 
fell somewhat stiffly upon her shoulders, its thick mass trimmed 
level at the ends. In it, as in a frame, was set the earnest, 
mysterious face wherein glowed her large and lovely eyes. 
Placed there on high, her rounded form wrapped in purest 
white did not look small, or perhaps the dignity of her mien, 
her folded hands and upright pose in her chair of state, seemed 
to add to its stature. She was smiling as she always smiled 
the coral-coloured lips were slightly parted, and in the ray of 
sunlight that fell upon her from the open roof, Edith could 
distinguish the rows of perfect teeth between them, while her 
head was turned a little that she might watch her companion 



f i 



1 



»9B 



Zb€ tROav of tbe Spirit 



with those wonderful and loving eyei. So this wu the Mvagc 
woman of whom she had been told, this ethereal and beautiful 
being with the wild, sweet face like to the face of an angel. 

Mastering a desire to chol :, Edith followed the woman's 
glance to the man at her side, for they sat together like the 
solemn, stately figures of husband and wife upon the Egyptian 
stele which years ago Rupert had brought from Egypt. Oh i 
it was Rupert, without - doubt, but Rupert changed. Cou'i 
that noble-looking c .eftain in the flowing robes of white whica 
hid his feet, and the stately head-dress, also of white, that fell 
upon his broad shoulders, be the same creature who, clad 
in his cheap and hideous garnr.snts, she had dismissed from her 
drawing-room in London as repulsive beyond bearing ? Then 
his beard was fiery red and straggling ; now it was iron-grey, 
trimmed square, and massive like his shoulders and his head. 
Then the eye that remained to him was red and bloodshot ; 
now it was large ar. "' luminous. The face also had grown 
spiritual, like that of nis companion, a light seemed to shine 
upon it which smoothed away its ruggedness. If not hand- 
some, he looked what he was — a leader of men, refined, good, 
noble, a man to love and to revere. 

All this Edith understood in a flash, and by the light of that 
illumination understood also for the first time the completeness 
of her own wicked folly. There, set above the common crowd, 
adored and adorable, with his beauteous consort, was the 
husband whom she had cast away like dirt — for Dick's sake. 
He, Dick, was speaking in her ear, and sne turned her head and 
glanced at him. His heavy eyes were staring greedily at the 
loveliness of Mea ; his fat, yellowish cheeks lay in folds above 
the not too well shaven chin. He wiped his bald head with 
a handkerchief that was no longer clean, and smelt of 
cigarettes and whisky. 

" By Jingo 1 " Dick was saying, " that little woman is some- 
thing like, isn't she ? No wonder our pious friend stopped in 
the Soudan. You are nice-looking, Edith, but you have all 



2abeD 



399 



your work cut out :o get him away from that houri. You had 
better go home and apply for a divorce on the ground of 
desertion, just to save your face." 

"Be silent," she whispered, almost in a hiss, and with a 
fierce flash of her eyes. 

Must she listen to Dick's ribaldry at such a moment ? Oh ! 
now she was sure of it, it was he whom she hated, not Rupert. 

Rupert was speaking in Arabic, and in a rich, slow voice 
that reached the remotest recesses of that immemorial hall, 
emphasising his words by quiet and dignified motions of his 
hands. He was speaking, and every soul of that great 
company, in utter silence and with heads bent in respect, 
hung upon his wisdom. 

Tabitha poked the interpreter with the point of her white 
umbrella and whispered. 

"Tell me, Achraet," she said, " what do his lordship say ? " 

Achmet listened, and from time to time interpreted the 
sense of Rupert's remarks in a low, rapid voice which none of 
the audience, who were unaware of their presence, overheard. 

"The noble lord, Zahed," he informed them, "talks of 
gratitude to God, which some of them have forgot ; he shows 
them how they should all be very grateful. He tells them his 
own story." 

"Ach! that is interesting," said Lady Devene. "Go on, 
Achmet. I did always want to bear that story." 

Achmet bowed and continued : " He says to his dear 
children that he tells them this story that they may learn by 
that example how grateful all people should be to Allah. He 
says that when he was a boy he fell into deep sin, as perhaps 
some of them have done, but God saved him then, and 
speaking by the voice of his mother, made him promise to sir 
no more in that way, which promise he kept, though he had 
sinned much in other ways. Then God lifted him up, and 
from a person of no estate made him one of importance, 
and, God preserving him all the time, he fought in battles and 






J«o 



TTbe May of tbe SpiHt 



killed people, for which, although it was in the lenrice of hii 
country, he is sorry now. Afterwards he went to his own land 
and took a wife whom he loved, but before she came to his 
house he was sent back to this coutury upon a mission, about 
which they know. The Sheik of the Sweet Wells attacked that 
mission and killed all of them except one Abdullah, their lady 
Tama here, Bakhiia who sat betjw, and himself. Him they 
tortured, cutting off his foot and putting out his eye, because 
he would not accept Islam, the false faith." 

" It is so : it is so," said the great audience, " we found you 
— but ah ! we took vengeance." 

"He saya," wtent on Achmet, "thai of vengeance and 
forgiveness he will talk to them presently Their lady Tama 
here nursed him back to life, and then he returned again 
to his own land." 
" Must I stay to listen to all this ?" said Edith fiercely. 
" No need," answered Tabitha, " you can go back anywhere, 
hut /shall sUy to listen. Go on, Achmet." 

Edith hesitated a moment, then not knowing whither to 
retreat, and being consumed with burning curiosity, stayed also. 
"He returned," continued Achmet, in his summary, "to 
find himself disgraced, no longer a man in honour, but one in 
a very small position, because he was supposed to have 
neglected his duty, and thereby brought about the death of 
many, and rubbed the face of the Govenment in the dirt. He 
returned also to find that the wealth and rank which would be 
his by right of inheritance had passed away from liim owing 
to an unexpected birth. Lastly, he returned to find that his 
wife would have nothing more to do with a man whom 
mutilations had made ugly, who was poor and without 
prospects, and at the mention of whose name other men looked 
aside. He sought his mother, and discovered that she was 
suddenly dead, so that he was left quite alone in the world. 
That hour was very bitter ; he could scarcely bear to think of 
it tren now." 



Zabe^ 



sot 



Here Rupert's voir- ♦rembled, the multitude of hit diidplea 
murmured, and the lady Tama, moved by a sudden impulse, 
bent towards him as though to pbce her hand upon his arm' 
in sympathy, then remembering, withdrew it, and muttered 
some words which he acknowledKed with a smile. Now 
Rupert spoke again, and Achmet, who was a clever interpreter, 
continued his rendering : 

" Zahed says that bitterness overwhelmed him, that faith in 
God departed, that his loneliness and his shame were such 
that he felt he could no longer live, that he went to a great 
river purposing to destroy himself 'jy drowning." 

Again there was a murmur which covered up the speaker's 
voice, and in the midst of it Dick whispered to iidith : 

•• Rather rough on you to drop in for this yam, but it is 
always well to hear both sides of a case." 

She made no answer. Her face was like that of the stone 
statue against which she leant. Again the unconcerned, 
brassy voice of the interpreter took up the tale : 

" Zahed says that while he prepared for death in the river, in 
the mist above the water Le saw a picture of their and his 
loved lady's face, and Allah brought into his mind a promise 
which he had made to her that if the ties of his duty were 
broken, he would return to be her brother and friend. Thus 
he was prevented from committing a great crime— a crime like 
that the man they had been speaking of had committed, and 
he had returned. As all there could bear witness, he, 
remembering the oaths which he had sworn to the wife who 
had rejected him, had been no more to Tama than a brother 
and a friend. This was not easy, since she and all of them 
knew that he loved her well, and he believed that she loved 
him well." 

"Aye, that I do," brok i, • ea, in a voice of infinite 

tenderness. "I love him m :.ian life, more than anything 

that is, has been, or shall be. I love him, oh I I love him, as 
much as he loves me." 



Mi 
l.M I 

■ B ' 

^1 



309 



Ube May of tbe Spirit 



" It is to, we tee with our eyes," said the multitude. 

"Well, now, he came to the that lay hid in the rough 
stone of his story. His lot had ucen hard. They would all 
of them think it hard that because of their duty their lady 
and he must live as they lived, one, yet separated, practising 
the great doctrine of Renunciation, having no hope of children 
to follow after them." 

The audience agreed that it was exceedingly hard. 

" They thought so, and so it had been at first, yet it had 
come to this, they loved their state and did not wish to change 
it, they who looked forward to other things, and to a life when 
the righteousness which they practised here would bring them 
yet closer together than they had ever been. They were r-iite 
happy who spent their days without remorse for the . or 
fear for the future ; they for whom death had no ten^ but 
was rather a gate of joy which they would pass gladly ha 1-in- 
hand. That was the nut of the story ; bitte as it might ue to 
the taste, it had in it the germ of life. Lo ! they had planted it 
on the earth, a) d yet even here, although as yet they did not see 
its flower, it had grown to a very p. asant iree under the shade 
of which they rested for a while anu were content. Let all of 
them there lay this poor example to their hearts. Let them 
not be discouraged when God seemed to deal hardly with 
them, like that poor man, their brother, who was dead by his 
own hand, since if in their degree they also practised 
Renunciation, made repentance and for right's sake abstained 
from sin, they would certainly find a reward. 

" Some of them had spoken '^ f vengeance, that thirst for 
vengeance, which the other day nad caused another of them 
to commit murder. Let them flee from the thought of it. 
Their lady here had practised vengean ce upon the bodies of 
those cruel Arabs who had slain his people and tortured 
himself, but now neither he nor she ~'ere happier on that 
account. The blood of those misguided men was on their 
hands, who, if they had left them alone, would doubtless have 



CabeD 



303 






been rewarded according to their deeds, but not through them, 
or, what was far better, would have hved to repent and find 
forgivenesi. Forgiveneti was the command of the lerciful 
God who forgave all that sought it of Him, and it should not 
be withheld even by the best of them who still had so much 
to be forgiven." 

"Would you forgive that woman of yours who deserted 
you, Zahed ? " cried Bakhita from below, 

"Surely I forgive her," answered Ru|)ert. "It would be 
strange if I did noi do so, seeing ttiat by her act she has made 
me happier, I think, than ever a man was before," and he 
tnrned and smiled again at Mea, who smiled back at him. 

Then up in that audience stood a blind old teacher, a 
mystic learned in the law, one who was beloved of the people 
for his wisdom and his good deeds, and yet perhaps at heart 
somewhat jealous of the new white pror>het to whom they 
had turned of late. 

"Hearken, Zahed ! " he said, " I with the o:Iiers have listened 
to your address, and I approve its spirit as I deplore the crimes 
that were its text. Yet it seems to me that you miss the root 
of the matter. Answer me if I am wrong. God oppressed 
you; He tried you for His own reasons; He rolled you in 
the mire; He brought down your soul to hell. The wife 
of your bosom, she deserted you, when you were in trouble 
then she struck as only a woman can. She said : ' Beggar, be 
gone; remove your rags and hideousness from before me. 
I will shelter with a richer lord.' So you went, and what did 
you ? You did not bow yourself before the decree of God, 
you did not say : ' I rejoice in the tempest as in the sunshine ; 
I acknowledge that I have deserved it all, and I give thanks 
now that my mouth is empty as I gave them when it was full.' 
No; you said — be not angry with me, Zahed, for a spirit is in my 
lips and I speak for your instruction. You said : 'I will not 
bear this pain. My soul is hot, it hisses. I will quench it in 
the waters of death. I will drug myself with death ; I will go 



304 



Ubc M«s ot tl>e Spirit 



to sleep because God my Maker has dealt hardly with 
me. V 

"Then God your Maker bowed Himself down and spoke to 
you out of heaven, by His magic He spoke to you; He showed 
you a face upon the waters, the face of one who loved you still, 
and thereby saved you alive. You came ; you found the face 
which smiled on you; you kept the letter of your oath 
to the false woman, but you broke its spirit. You loved her, 
our lady Tama, and she loved you ; you said, both of you : 
* We renounce because we love so much. We are good lest 
in time to come our sin should separate us. To gain much 
you gave a little, you whose eyes are opened, you who see 
something of the truth, who know that this life is no more 
than the oasis* of Tama compared to the great stars above, 
those stars which you will one day travel.' 

" Listen to me, Zahed, I speak for your instruction. I do 
not blame you, nor do I think God will blame you who made 
you of the mud beneath His feet, not of the light about His 
head. He will have pity. He will say: 'Mud, you have 
done well — for mud.' But I am His advocate here, to-day it 
is given to me to be His voice. Answer Him a question now 
if you can. If not, remain silent and weep because you are still 
mud. You hold yourself bound to this base woman, who should 
be beaten with rods, do you not ? You acknowledge it openly, 
who will not take another wife. You preach the doctrine of 
forgiveness to us, do you not ? You say that you forgive her. 
Why? Nay, be silent, now the Voice is in my mouth — not in 
yours. Speak presently when you have heard it. You forgive 
her because her wickedness has worked your weal ; because she 
has brought you to love and to honour among men. 

" Well, now ; hear me and make answer. If that accursed 
woman, that daughter of Satan, were to come hither to-day, if 
she were to say to you : ' I repent, who was wicked. I love, 
who hated. I put you in mind of the oath you swore. I 
demand that you leave the sweet lady at your side and the 






Zabeft 3^5 

people who wowhip yo^and the gardens that you hare made 
«d the weUs that you\.ve digged, and return to live with 
me in a hell of streets upon which the sun never shines, that 

Lh?k^.T ^°" '^"''''" *° '^""^ "P '^^ P'""» °^ yo"r house, 
and that I may grow great in your shadow.' 

"Tell us now. what would you answer her? Would vou 
say: Is not my name Zahed ? Therefore I come, I come at 
once ; and thereby show us that you are perfect indeed ? Or 
would you say : 'Woman, you built the wall, you broke the 
bndg^ you dug the gulf. I am lame, I ^Lot dTmb I 
am afraid. I dare not swim; I have no wings, I may not fly. 
I forgive you afar; I do not forgive you at my side. I love 
you and all mankind, but I will not touch your hand. I rive 
oyou the writings of divorce.' Would you speak thus, and 
let us see that you are still a man of mud ? Answer now the 
question that God puts to you through my lips. Zahed Or 
If you carmot answer, you who preach Renunciation and 
Forgiveness, here is mud. smear it on your forehead and be 

Now Mea had been listening, with a great and ever-growing 
indignation, to this long address, designed to set out one of 
those test cases which are so dear to Eastern religious thought 
and methods, and to force a holy man to admit that, after all. 
ne IS full of error. 

"I at least will answer," she broke in, before Rupert could 

LT^K^ In ; " "^'^ '' ''■' jealous-hearted, white-headed 
fool that fills the .iir with sand, like the Campsine blast; that 
stams the clear pool with dirt, like a thirsty camel; that says 
the Spirit of God is in his lips, those lips that utter wind and 
emptiness; that tries to convict of sin where there is no sin 
and to show one who is a thousandfold his better, a ne. path 
to heaven? Did God then decree when a man has been 
rolled m mire and washed himself clean again, that he should 
return to the mire at the bidding of her who befouled him ? 
Did God decree that a man should leave those with whom he 

u 



jj 



U h 



3o6 



XSbc Wixs of tbe Strttit 



lives in innocence, to share the home rf his betrayer whom he 

hates ? Is it virtue to be made vile ? 'is it righteous to clothe 

oneself in the rags of another's wickedness ? Make reply, you 

babbler, old in self-conceit, you who think to gain honour by 

defeating your lord in words before his people. Make reply, 

you that wrap yourself with words as with a garment, and sit 

upon pride as a sheepskin, and say, wherefore should the true 

be thrust aside for the false ? Wherefore should my heart be 

widowed, that another who sowed thistles may pluck flowers?" 

Now the old teacher plucked his beard and began in wrath : 

" Do I, a learned man, one who has thought and studied 

long, come here to wrangle with a hungry woman who covets 

the fruit she may not eat—" 

•• Silence ! " * broke in Rupert, in his great voice—" silence ! 
Tama, give not way to anger— it is not fitting, and you, my 
questioner and friend, speak no more words against the lady 
whom in your heart you love and honour. When that case of 
which you tell happens, as I pray it may not happen, then I 
will take counsel with my conscience, and do as it shall 
bid me. I have said." 

Now Rupert turned to Mea to soothe her, for this talk had 
made her more angry than she had been for years, so angry 
that in the old days that holy teacher's life might well have 
paid its price; while the audience fell to arguing the point 
among themselves and were so occupied, all of them, that they 
never saw a woman with a shawl thrown over her head, who 
thrust her way through them till she stood in front of the 
platform. 



CHAPTER XXII 



EDITH AND MEA 

iTru^fJH"^""^ '' '"• ^°* °"* ^'"'^ *^""t' «°t 0"e rough 
word had that mercless interpreter glossed over. She had 

heard herself called "a woman who should be scourged with 

rods" and «a daughter of Satan." She had heard he.. ' 

while Dxck sniggered behind her. and Tabitha strove o 

repress a smile that she felt to be unholy, compared to mire 

n which, If a man rolled, he could never be clean again, and 
to a sower of poisonous weeds, and this by that other hateful 
woman who had bewitched her husband with her beautv She 
could bear no more ; for once her bitter anger made her'almost 
heroic. She would face them there ..nd then. She would 
demand an answer to the question m^ed in such forcible 
language by that blind and sardonic Arab, whose pleasure it 
was to p,ck the holiness cr other men to pieces. She hid 
herself in the shawl. She pushed herself through the crowd • 
she stood in front of the platform, then suddenly unveiled ' 

Mea saw her first ; some instinct of intense antipathy caused 

«tl i°f ,r°""^ '°u ^""^ ^'' "^^'^ '^^- Suddenly she 
stiffened, falling mto that attitude which she assumed when 

as judge, she passed sentence on a criminal. Then she spoke 
m Enghsh, asking, although already her heart knew the answer 
to the question, she who remembered well the picture in the 
locket that Rupert used to wear : 

"Stranger, who are you who creep into my house not asked ? 
And what seek you ? " 

Hearing her voice, Rupert looked round also. Next instant 

307 






I 



■iwm' -^t^sTg'fi'-.-ErB-.aj-r-siFiT-r: 



'ih 




Ube TRaav ot tbe Spirit 



ke was clinging to the arms of his chair to prevent himself 
from falling out of it, while over his face there spread a look 
of woe and terror, such as a man might wear who suddenly 
thinks he sees a hated ghost come to summon him to hell. 
His heart stopped, his sight grew dim, a cold sweat burst 
out upon his forehead. 

••I am the Lady Devene," Edith answered, "and I am 
here to seek my husband. Lord Devene, who sits at your 
side." 

By now Mea had recovered herself, for she felt the crisis 
of her life had come, and her bold spirit rose to meet it. f i 
grew quiet, quick, resourceful. 

" Is it so ? " she said. " Then that old teacher, he must be, 
what you call him, a prophet — or perhaps he hear you come. 
You want seek Lord Devene, him whom you spit on when 
he was Rupert UUershaw Bey? Yes? Well, Zahed no look 
as though he wish to go away with you, his face all change," 
and she pointed to Rupert's agonised countenance. 

" I am speaking to my husband, not to you, woman," said 
Edith. 
Mea shook her beautiful head and smiled. 
"Woman wrong word. I great lady here; lady whom he 
love but no marry — till you die, al.is ! " 

Rupert still seemed unable to speak, and Edith positively 
choked with wrath, so, perhaps to prevent any awkward pause, 
Mea continued the conversation. 

"Who those?" she asked, pointing with her finger at 
Tabitha and Dick, who, with the interpreter, were making 
their way towards the platform. "Your mama come to look 
after you ? And him ? Oh ! I know. That gentleman you 
love. Him for who you turn Zahed into the street. Oh! 
I know, I know. Old woman down there with white head," and 
she pointed to Bakhita, who was watching all this scene with 
the grimmest interest, "she have magic; she show me his 
ugly face in water. He swim about in water with the tail 



BWtb and nDea 309 

of a snake, head-man, heart-snake, you understand, yes? 
Uakhita show you some magic, too, if you like " 
Now at last Rupert shook himself free from his faintness. 
l!.dith, he said, " why have you come here ?» 

al^^fl ^ ,5^^" *° ''°'"^^'" '^^ answered, while she 
gathered herself together, "for I don't seem very welcome, do 
I Also this place isn't pleasant, its inhabitants are too fond 
of personal remarks." 

Then she paused and presently flung her words at him, few 
and swift and straight. 

J'i ?J".^' ^"''^'■*' *° ^'^ y°" ^° ^^^'^er the riddle which that 
bhnd old dervish has been amusing himself by putting to you 
at such length. Will you return to your duty and your deserted 
wife? Or will you stop here, as the-the friend of that shameless 
person and head-priest of her barbarians?" 

" Please, Edith," said Rupert, « be a little milder in your 
language. These people are peculiar, and my power here is 
limited; if you apply such names to Tama, and they come to 
understand them, I cannot answer for the consequences " 

" I did not ask you to answer for the consequences, I asked 
you to answer my question," replied Edith, biting her white 

"It seems to require some thought," said Rupert sadly 
Then he lifted his hand and addressed, the audience, who 
were watching what passed with wondering eyes 

"Brothers and sisters," he said, "a wonderful thing has 
happened. In speaking to you to-day about the crimes that have 
been done in Tama. I told you my own story for an example. 
1 hen the teacher yonder showed me how weak and evil I really 
was, and put a question to me as to whether, should she appear 
and ask it, I would take back the wife of that story, she that 
had wrought me evil in the past. Now this wife stands before 
me, ^ demand? -he decision which I .aid I would give when 
thr cam.. X. has come— that evil day has dawned upon 

me . never thought to see it, forgetting that things have 



-II 



m 



i 



1 -M 






$f 



XLhtW J of tbe Sptttt 



changtd in tht matttr of my fortunes across the »ea. Yet, my 
brethren, shall I be wrong if I ask for a while to think ? If, for 
instance, I say that when we meet again as is our custom on 
this same day of the next month, I then decide, and not 

before?" 

" No, no, you will be right, Zahed," they murmured, the blmd 
old mystic leading them with his shrill voice. " We will have 
it so." More, great men among them stood up here and there 
and shouted that he should not go, that they would gather their 
servants and guard the pass, and if need be, keep him prisoner, 
or— and they looked viciously at Dick and his companions. 

Achmet translated their remarks, adding, on his own account: 
" This people in damned nasty temper— very private people and 
very fierce who love Zahed. You must not make them angry, 
or perhaps they kill us all. I came here to interpret, not to 
have throat cut." 

Dick also seizing the situation with remarkable swiftness, 
was equally urgent and out-spoken. 

" Don't show off. any of your airs and graces here, Edith, 
please," he said, " I am not anxious to follow the example of 
our friend, the god upon the platform, and renounce the world 
in a wider fashion. That little tartar of a woman would jump 
at a chance of murdering us, and she can do it if she likes." 

Only Tabitha, weary with standing, sank down on to a 
block of stone, and incidentally into the lap of a native who 
already occupied it, and scarcely heeding his wild struggles to 
be free, fanned herself with a broad-brimmed hat and 

remarked : , .„ t • 

" Ach I do not trouble. If they kill us, they kill us. It is 

very interesting to hear them say their minds so well. I am 

most glad that we came." 
« You hear their answer, Edith," said Rupert, " and you 

must understand my position. Have you any objection to 

make?" 
" I understand your position perfectly, Rupert, and I am 



E^ttb an& Aea 



4'-' 
if i 



3" 



quite aware that a man may find it difficult — most difficult, to 
escape from certain kinds of entanglements/' and she glanced 
at Mea and paused. 

"Wrong word again," tnurmi ed that lady, with a sweet 
smile ; " no what you call it, no tangles, only one great rope of 
love, too thick to cut, too strong to break — much ! " 

"As for objections," went on Edith, without heeding this 
melodious and poetic interruption, " I could make scores, but 
since we don't wish to be butchered by your amiable prot4g4s, 
perhaps I had better hold my tongue and give you a month in 
which to come to your right mind. Only I am by no means 
sure that I shall stop here all that time." 

" Don't stop if you no like," broke in Mea again. " Please 
not — the road it always open, give you camel, give you soldiers, 
give you food, and write you. letter afterwards to tell you how 
Zahed make up his mind. I can write very nice letter all in 
English, learn that at Luxor, or if you rather, write in Arabic." 

At this sally Dick grinned, for it pleased his wounded soul to 
see Edith getting the worst of it for once in her life, and Tabitha 
burst out laughing. The general effect was to induce Edith to 
change her mind rapidly. 

" Yes, I shall stop," she went on, as though she had never 
suggested anything else, '• because I suppose it is my duty to 
give him every chance." 

"Glad you stop," said Mea, "my humble people much 
honoured. Give you nice house, high up there on the 
mountain since in this month you catch great fever down here 
and perhaps stop too long," and turning, she issued a sharp 
and sudden order whereat men sprang up, bowed and ran to 
do her bidding. 

" What's that?" asked Dick nervously. 

"Nothing," said Mea, "only tell them make ready house on 
the mountain and take your things there and set guard about 
it do you no be hurt. Now I go. Good-night ! " whereon 
she rose, bowed to her people, bowed to her guests, and then, 



'if I 



I* 

i . 



i i i 



3ia 



XTbe May of tbe Spirit 



making a deep obeisance to Rupert, lifted his hand and with 
it touched her brow. After this she descended from the plat- 
form, and at its foot was instantly surrounded by an armed 
guard, in the midst of which, preceded by old Bakhita, Mea 
marchei down the passage between the central columns of the 
great hall, while to right and left, as was their custom on these 
days of ceremony, her people prostrated themselves as she 
passed, shouting : " Tama ! Tama I " 

" Himmel," said Tabitha, " Himmel, she is charming I No 
wonder Rupert do love her, like all her folks. Look how they 
bow. Achmet, where is my photograph thing? I wish to 
take them quick." 

"Mustn't take photograph here," answered Achmet 
gloomily ; " thby think that bad magic, great big evil eye. 
No photograph, please." 

But Tabitha had already forgotten her intention and was 
advancing towards Rupert. 

" My dear Rupert," she said, as climbing the platform she 
dropped into the throne-like chair vacated by Mea, and then 
bending forward, solemnly kissed him upon the brow. " My 
dear Rupert, oh ! I am glad to see you, I cannot say how glad." 

" I am glad to see you also, Tabitha," he answered, 
"though I wish we could have met under more pleasant 
circumstances." 

**Ach! you are in a deep hole," she said, "down at the 
bottom of a well, but there is light above, and who knows, you 
may come out again." 

" I don't see how," he answered sadly. 

" No ; but God sees. Perhaps He will pull you o. I am 
sorry for you. dear. I have no patience with Edith, ai.» that 
Dick, I hate him now and always." 

"Tell me a little about things," he said, "we may not 
have another chance." 

So she told him all she knew. Dick and Edith had 
vanished back through the side door; the audience for the 



JB^itb and /Dea 313 

most part had melted away, only a few of them remaining at 
the far end of the hall. As she spoke rapidly, mixing German 
and Enghsh words together, although his intelligence followed 
her, Rupert's mind wandered, as was its ancient fashion. He 
recalled, for instance, how Tabitha and he had once sat 
together upon another dais in a very different hall far away in 
England. 

" You remember," he said suddenly, " that New Year's Eve 
at Devene, the night I got engaged, and what you told me 
then ? " 

She nodded. 

" You said she would breed trouble," he went on; "you 
said she was very dangerous. Well, it is so, and now-what 
am I to do ? " 

"Nothing at all, just wait," she answered. "You have a 
month, and during that time you need only see her in public. 
In a month many things may happen. Indeed, I do think 
that thmgs will happen," and once again that fateful look 
crept over the strong, solid face and into the quiet eyes, 
the same look that he had noted years ago when she sat 
with him on the dais in the hail at Devene. "God He 
does not desert men like you, Rupert, who have suffered so 
cruelly and behaved so well," she murmured, gently pressing 
h^ hand. "Look! Dick has come back and is calling me. 
When shall we meet again ? " 

"To-morrow," he said, " I cannot see her to-night. I will 
not see her privately at all till the month is up. You must 
make her understand." 

"Oh ! she understands well enough, and so does Dick, and 
so do I. But are they safe here ? " 

" Safer than in London, only they must not speak ill of che 
lady Tama. Good-night I " 

"Good-night, dear Rupert," she said, and went away, leaving 
him seated there alone upon the platform. 



I 



s^M' _-; _aK^!i5;cs 



3»4 



TCbe May of tbe %pMt 



That night Tabitha and Edith slept in the house which 
Mea had assigned to them. It was situated upon a mountain- 
crest over two miles from the town of which it formed part of 
the fortifications, was cool, and commanded a beautiful view. 
To Dick Learmer was given a similar but somewhat smaller 
house belonging to the same chain of defences, but about five 
hundred yards away. Both of these houses were provisioned, 
and both of them guarded day and night, that no harm might 
come to the guests of the tribe. 

So angry was Edith that for a loi g while she would scarcely 
speak to Tabitha, who, their meal finished, sat upon a kind of 
verandah or outlook place, a shut Bible upon her knees, looking 
at the moonlit desert upon the one hand, and the misty oasis 
on the other. At this game of silence her patient, untroubled 
mind was far stronger than that of Edith. At length the latter 
could bear it no longer ; the deep peace of the place, which 
should have soothed, only exasperated her raw temper. She 
broke out into a flood of words. She abused Tabitha 
for bringing her here and exposing her to such insults. She 
n. ied Mea by ill names. She declared that she would go 
away at once. 

•• Ah ! " asked Tabitha at last, " and will you Uke Dick with 

you?" 

"No," she answered ; '• I never want to see Dick or any of 

you again." 

" That is unlucky for me," said Tabitha ; " but since I have 
reached this nice place, I shall stay here the month and talk 
with Rupert. Perhaps if he and that pretty lady will have me, 
I shall stay longer. But I, too, do not want the company of 
Dick. As for you, dear Edith, if you wish to go, they told you, 
the road is open. It will save much trouble to everybody." 

«I shall not go," exclaimed Edith. "Why should I leave 
my husband with that woman who has no right to him ? " 

" I am not so sure," answered Tabitha thoughtfully. " If my 
little dog is caught in a trap and is ill, and I kick it into the 



B^itb an& Acii 315 

•tre«t, and leave it there to starve, and some kind lady comes 
and takes my little dog and gives it a good home for years, 
can I say that she has no right to it just because I find out, 
after all, that it is a valuable little dog, and that I am -oh I so 
fond of it ? " 

"Please stop talking nonsense about little dogs, Tabitha. 
Rupert is not a dog." 

" No ; but then why should he have been treated as one ? 
If such a dog would have learned to love its new mistress, is it 
wonderful that he should do the same r" But have you learnt 
to care for him at last, that you should want him back so much, 
he who lives here good and happy ? " 

•• I don't know," snapped Edith ; " but I won't leave him 
with that other woman if I can help it ; I don't trust all that 
Platonic nonsense. I am going to bed ; " and she went. 

But Tabitha still sat for a long time and gazed at the 
moonlit desert, there making her accustomed prayers. 

"Oh! God in heaven," she ended them, "help those two 
poor people whom Thou hast tried so sorely," and as she 
spoke the words a conviction came into her mind that they 
would be heard. Then, feeling comforted, she too went to her 
bed. 

In the morning Edith received a note from Rupert ; it was 
the first time that she had seen his handwriting for many a 
year. It ran : 

" Dear Edith,— I will not debate the strange circumstances 
in which we find ourselves, and I write to ask that during the 
ensuing month you will avoid all allusion to them. The facts 
are known to us both, to discuss them further can only lead 
to unnecessary bitterness, and perhaps prevent a peaceful 
solution of the trouble. If you agree to this, I write on behalf 
of the lady Tama and myself to say that we are ready to enter 
into -* like undertaking, and that we shall be happy to see you 
hert •rhenever you wish. 



^ 



11 
i 



nm.^^s^ui^i^tHnsnowssmr'-- 



iiiiiiWiii I 



3t6 



TTbe mii9 of tbe StHrlt 



welild ^.*A* ***'**' ''""'*• ^^" ^'^ "*** •^^^ »»>•" I think that 

*^' "Rupert." 

Edith thought a while, then she took a piece of paper and 
wrote upon it with a pencil: ^^ 

"P.S.~.l enclose a letter which I have for vou H* 

" After alV she reflected to herself, as she saw the runner 
depart swiftly, carrying her packet on (he top ofa IV tick 
Uw.ll g.ve me a little time to look round in peace Vu;:^ 
» right. It ., no use wrangling. Moreover, he and that wo^n 
are masters here, and I must obey." 

Within an hour the runner returned again, bearine anothi^r 
note from Mea, which, in very queer English a^ed them both 
to honour them with their company at the midday rnealThev 
went, and on the way met Dick, who had received a simS 
.nvnauon On arriving at the town, they founTkupe « se" " 

beneaththe verandah ofhishouse.andsquatteduponfhg^^und 
around h.m a considerable number of people all of them 
suffering from various complaints, together wfth some wo^en 
who held sick children in their arms. He bowed to th.^ ^ 
called out in a cheerful voice : '^'"' *"^ 

" Forgive me for a little while. I have nearlv finwh»^ 
mornings doctoring, and perhaps you had b^^tt sUnd L^ 
for some of these ailments are infectious " ' 

Edith and Dick took the hint at once, riding their animal, 
mto the shade of a tree a little way off Not so tS 
Descendingfrom her donkey witha b/mp. .he mlhed^^^^^^^^ 
to Rupert and shook his hand. Two minutes laterly 



EMtb «n5 Aea 317 

perceived that the wm helping him to bandage wounds and 
dispense medicines. 

"How she can I " excUimed Edith, "and the worst of it it 
•he IS sure to bring some filthy disease back with her. Just 
think of Rupert taking to doctoring all those horrid people ! " 
^^ They say he is uncommonly clever at it," answered Dick, 

and will nde for miles to see a sick person. Perhaps that 
IS why they are so fond of him." 

"Why don't you go to help him?" asked Edith. "You 
studied medicine for two years before you went to the Bar " 

"Thanks/' he answered. "I think it is pleasanter sitting 
under this tree with you. At present I am not a candidate 
for popular affection, so I don't see why I should t:.ke any 
risks." ' 

" Rupert doesn't mind risks," said Edith. 

"No," he said, "one of his characteristics always was to like 
what IS disagreeable and dangerous. In that fact lies your best 
chance, Edith. He mar even make up his mind to abandon 
an existence which seems to suit hiia exactly and return to the 
joys of civilisation." 

"You are even ruder than usual, Dick," she said. "Why 
did you come here at all ? We never asked you." 

" You cannot pretend, Edith, that gentleness has been vout 
prevaihng note of late. For the rest, considering that on the 
results of this inquiry depended whether I should be one of 
the richest men in England or a beggar, it is not strange that 
I came to look after ray own interests," he added bitterly. 

" Well, you know now," she answered, " so why don't you go 
away? Rupert is alive, therefore the property is his, not 
yours." 

"Quite so; but even Rupert is not immortal. He n" t- 
contract one of those sicknesses, for instance." 

"No such luck for you, Dick," she said, with a laugh • "he 
«» ♦"" much accustomed to th ' 



nl 



that 



you 



: get rid of him like 



3i8 



Ubc Mai? of tbe Spirit 



I ■ I 




"I admit it is improbable, for he looks singularly healthy, 
does he not? But who knows? At any -♦- he is a 
good-natured fellow; I may be able to come to some terms 
with him. Also," he added, in another voice, "please under- 
stand once and for all that I am going to see this play out, 
whatever you or anybody else may say or do. I was in at the 
beginning, and I mean to be in at the death." 

Edith shrugged her shoulders, turning away, for there was a 
very unpleasant look upon Dick's face, and just at that moment 
they saw Rupert, who had washed his hi',nds and changed his 
robe, riding towards them upon a white mule by the side of 
which walked Tabitha. He could not take off his hat because 
he wore a keffieh, but he saluted Edith by placing his fingers 
upon his forehead, and then stretched out his hand to her and 
to Dick. * 

" Forgive my dismounting, E<^ith," he said, in a pleasant 
voice, "but you remember what a dreadful cripple I am, and I 
haven't been able to grow a new foot, or even to get an arti- 
ficial one here. I did send for the article, but it must have 
been made for a lady; at any rate, it was three sizes too small, 
and now adorns a black old beggar woman." 

Edith laughed ; somehow the thought of Rupert's mutilated 
stole no longer filled her with horror. 

" Mea is expecting you all to luncheon," he said, "if I may 
so call our unconventional meal. Will you come ? " 

She nodded, making a funny little face, and rode away 
towards Mea's house at Rupert's side. 

"Did you get my note," she said suddenly, "and the 
enclosures ? 

"Yes," he answered, " his letter is very painful—very painful 
indeed, and the others are interesting. But we have agreed 
not to talk about those things, haven't we, until the month 
is up?" 

•' Certainly, Rupert," she answered, in a gentle voice. " So 
far as I am concerned, the past is all gone. I am here now 



•WB-^«P 



£Mtb mb Aea 



3»9 



not to consider myself, but to do what you desire. I only 
wish to say tha T am sorry if I spoke as I should not yesterday 
—and for ■ ny other tlii'ii^s also, Rupert, but really it was hard 
to have to ist'-/i to all f? jse bitter words, even if I deserved 
them." 

" I understdiiu— icry hard," he said, flushing, " and now for 
the next month it is settled that we are going to be just friends, 
is it not ? " 

" Yes, Rupert, as you have ordered it," she whispered, and 
glancing at her, he saw that there were tears standing in her 
blue eyes. 

" This business is going to be even harder than 1 thought," 
reflected Rupert to himself, and in another moment Mea, clad 
in her spotless white, was receiving them with gracious smiles 
and Oriental courtesy. 



wmmmmmm 



w^ 



CHAPTER XXIII 



THE WHEEL TURNS 



This meal in Mea's house proved to be the beginning of a 
very curious existence for the four persons chiefly concerned 
in our history. Every day, or almost every day, they met, and 
the solemn farce was carried on. Mea and Rupert played 
their parts of courteous hosts, Edith and Dick those of obliged 
and interested guests, while Tabitha watched them all 
with her quiet eyes and wondered what would befall when 
the truce came to an end. Soon she and Mea were very good 
friends, so good that from time to time the latter would even 
lift a comer of the veil of Eastern imperturbability which hid 
her heart, and suffer her to guess what pain and terrors racked 
her. Only of these matters they did not speak ; not to do 
so was a part of the general conspiracy of silence. 

Edith was with Rupert as often as possible ; she even took 
long rides which she hated, in order to share his company, 
whilst with a feverish earnestness he discoursed to her of all 
things in heaven and earth, except those things which leapt 
to the lips of both of them. She watched him at his work, and 
learned to understand how great that work was and how well 
it had been done. She perceived that he was adored by all, 
from Mea herself down to the little children that could hardly 
walk, and began to comprehend the qualities which made him 
thus universally beloved. More — the truth may as well be 
told at once — now, for the first time in her life, they produced a 
deep impression upon her. 

At last Edith b^an to fall in love with, or if that is too 

320 



Ubc TRIlbccI TTurns 32, 

ZZl ' T^v! ^'u'"^'"*" '"^'^y *° "^"^"^ ^'' »^"«band. not his 
nature only, but h,s outward self as well, that self whici to he 
had once seemed so hateful, especially when she compared him 
w th another man. Now. by some strange turn of the whed 

whom .r'r'V' ''' '^'' ""'^'^ '"^^ ^^° ^'' hateful, from 
whom she shrank as once she had shrunk from Rupert, taking 
infinite pams to avoid his company, and still more the tender 
nesses which he occasionally tried to proffer ; he who also had 
grown veiyjeaous. The fact of Mea's obvious adoration of 
Kupert may. of course, in the case of a character like Edith's 

face but It was by no means its only cause. Retribution had 
falen upon her; the hand of Fate had pressed her down 
before this man's feet. 

him. Rupert was most courteous and polite, very charming 
.ndeed. but she felt that ail these things were an armour which 
she could not pierce, that as he had once said, his nature and 
nis sp- .e m repugnance against her. Twice or thrice she 

00k . ,portunity to touch him. only to become aware 

that he .arank from her, not with the quick movement 
of a man who desires to avoid being betrayed into feeling, or 
led mto temptation, but because of an unconquerable innate 
distaste - quite a different thing. She remembered his 
dreadful words of divorce, how he had said that henceforth 
he hated her, and that even should she in the future swear that 
she loved him, he would not lay a finger-tip upo;. her. Why 
should be indeed when another woman, more faithful, more 
spiritual-and yes. she must admit it. more lovely, wis the 
companion of his every waking thought and hour 

See Edith now after she has spent fourteen days in her 
husbands company. She is tired with the long ride she has 
taken in the hot sun just to be with him. feigning an 
interest m things which she did not understand, abouf the 
propagation of date-palms, for instance, as though she cared 



P! 



■ H 



i! 



33a 



TTbe mwe of tbe Spirit 



anytl'ing whether they grew from seed or offshoots. Tired, 
too, with her long, unceasing effort to show him her best side, 
to look cool and attractive in that heat and mounted on a 
skittish horse which frightened her. (How, she wondered, did 
Mea contrive never to seem hot or to lose her dignity, and 
why did her hair always remain so crisp and unruffled even 
beneath her white head-dress?) Annoyed also by Dick, who 
had accompanied her borne and showed his ever-growing 
jealousy in a most unpleasant fashion, firing arrow after arrow 
of his coarse sarcasm at her, even reminding her of that 
afternoon years ago when her husband was supposed to be dead 
and she became engaged to him. She had scarcely replied ; it 
did not seem worth while, only in her heart she vowed that 
should she ever have an opportunity, she wjuld be rid of 
Dick once and for all. Yes, she did not care what he might 
say or what letters he threatened to publish, she would face it 
out and have done with him, as she wished that she had 
found courage to do long ago. 

Now she was in her own room, and stretched face down- 
wards upon her angarib or native bedstead, she sobbed in the 
bitterness of her soul. All her wiles, all her charm could not 
prevail against that small but royal-lcc! ing Eastern woman 
with the ready v»»i, the single aim, the mysterious face and 
the eyes like Fate, who had risen up against her and taken 
with gratitude the man whom she had once rejected, con- 
tented if only she might own his heart. Had it been 
otherwise, quarrels might have arisen, or he might have 
wearied of her; but that was the worst of it, where there 
was no marriage there coald be no wearying. Always she 
stretched before him a go.rden of Eden, a paradise from 
which he was turned back by the flame-sworded angels of 
his own strict righteousness and oath. And into the rival 
garden which she, Edith, had to offer, whereof the gates, 
once so locked and barred, now stood wide, he showed no 
wish to wander. 



TTbe mhctl untns 3,3 

month agam she faced that alien multitude wi h their stonv 
contemptuous eyes? Oh ! surely then she would hea th "h'e 

that h. T "T"\ ""' ''"^^^' ^"^ ^^^^ ^--i-ce of his 
that he found no law which forced him to return to a woman 

111 r •"!' ''"^ *'^* ^^ ^'^-^^ ^- his t tie and h" 
wealth and wished her well, but that himself he would bide 
where he was and discuss philosophy, and doubtles otTer 
things, wuh bs lady Tama, the beautTul and perfect 

It was too much. Edith gave wav tn «,.•»#• » 

her sobs .hoed i„ ..e e^prL^CCd ^S 

rjllThfr.feV''^ "■'" '^'""°" «" -' -- '" 'o - 

"Axe you ill? "she asked. 

Edith in her night-dress sat up on the angarib her far*. ».f 
with tears, her hair falling about her shoulders ' 

;; I suppose so," she answered. " At least I am unhaonv 
which IS the same thing." unnappy, 

" What about ? Has that Dick—" 
"Oh! never mind Dick; I am tired of Dick." 
What IS it. then ? Rupert?" 

« I^i °^ ''°""^' ^'^ y°" ^""^^^ Tabitha ? » 
Ach ! I thmk I see as far as most. But why should vo„ 

^:Ll,lT','/ ^° ^"^ ^^°"'^^-- woman wLoLd 
wandered here. I do not want his kindness." 

What, then, do you want ? His anger ? " 
"No ; I want— his love." 

"You can't buy that for less than nothing, especially when 

tXhlf^r^-"^'^^-^ ^" ^'^ -rket,"Lafkedl:;;:: 

"I don't know what you call for l«s than nothing, 



II I 



Ube Wivs of tbe Spirit 

Tabitha. Is everything that I have to give less than 

nothing ? " 

" Mein Gott ! I see. You do mean that you are in love 

with him yourself? " 

"Yes, I suppose that is what I mean. At any rate, he is 
my husband— I have a right to him." 

Again Lady Devene reflected, then said : 

" I always did wonder if it would end so. If you can come 
to care, pity it was not long ago. Why have you put it off 
so long, Edith ? Now I think that perhaps it will be too late. 
What's your English proverb ?— one day behind the fair." 

•• If that is all you have to say, you might have stopped in 
your room," answered Edith, between her sobs. 

" Himmel !; what more can I say than the truth ? I did not 
cook this pudding, Edith. You cook it, and you must eat it. 
What is the good to cry out that it is nasty now. Still I am 
sorry for you, my poor Ediih, who find out that if you throw 
enough stones into the air, sometimes one fall upon your 

head." 

"Go away, please," said Edith; "I don't want to be pitied, 
and I don't want to be lectured. Leave me alone to eat what 

you call my pudding." 

" Very well," answered Tabitha quietly ; "but you take my 
advice, you ask God to make it sweeter, which you always 

forget to do." 

" I have forgotten too long, I am afraid," said Edith, throwing 
herself down again on the angarib and turning her face to the 
wall. 



There were other sore hearts in Tama that night. For 
instance, Rupert could not fail to see, if not all, at any rate a 
great deal of what was passing in his wife's mind. He under- 
stood that she was earnestly sorry for what she had done and 
heartily wished it undone. He was sure, also, from his know- 
ledge of their previous close relations, from the by no means 



^V 



mr^i>fi;hf4K it 



■-i«?i'-^»."«~- 



I 



TTbe Mbeel Zwns 



3*5 



obscure hints that she gave him, and from what he observed of 
them when they were totiether, that throughout she had acted 
under the influence of Dick, who ha<i made love to her both 
before their marriage and after his own supposed death, which 
infli'^nce no longer had weight with her, although she still 
greatly feared the man. Indeed, upon this matter he had 
other sources of information — Tabitha, who told him a 
great deal, and Dick himself who had tried to blacken Edith 
in his eyes by letting little facts escape him— accidentally. 
Thus it came out that he And been lunching with Edith alone 
on that New Year's Eve when Rupert returned to England, 
and by inference that they were then on exceedingly intimate 
terms. 

As a matter of fact, this revelation and others had an opposite 
effect to that which was intended. They caused Rupert to 
make allowances for Edith, and to understand that what he 
had set down to mere cruelty and self-seeking, was perhaps 
attributable to some passion which possessed her for this 
despicable man. He knew enough of the world to be aware 
of the positive loathing with which a woman who is thus 
afflicted will generally look upon any other man, even one 
whom she has previously loved. 

Now, pondered the gentle and compassionate Rupert, sup- 
posing that he being apparently dead, his wife in name had 
given way to this impulse and engaged herself to Dick with 
the usual affectionate ceremonies (and he gathered that some- 
thing of the sort had happened), and that then there appeared 
that dead man as he was at the time. Well, should not allow- 
ances be made for her, after all, she who, he was sure, had 
already repented in sackcloth and ashes, and to whom this 
Dick was, to put it mildly, no longer agreeable ? 

Meanwhile, hard as he might strive to conquer it — for was 
not this an excellent opportunity to exercise his own doctrines 
of renunciation and forgiveness ? — he was possessed by a 
longing which at times became almost uncontrollable, if not to 



I 



! 



3a6 



TTbe mtps ot tbe Spidt 



twist Learmer's neck, at least to kick him with contume'/ out 
of Tama, where, it may added, he was already making hiL self 
a nuisance in various ways. 

Such was the case against himself. But on the other hand, 
he mu!,; face the terrible fact that those words which he had 
spoken in the London drawing-room were, so far as he was 
concerned, utterly irrevocable. The sudden detestation, the 
shrinking of body and of soul that he had then conceived 
for his wife, remained quite unaltered. To talk with her was 
well enough, but the thought of returning to her made 
him absolutely shudder. 

Yet the fact that to enter on to married life with Edith 
would be to him the greatest purgatory; would mean also 
abandoning all his hopes and interests in order to seek others 
which he did not deshe, could not, his conscience told him, 
affect the rights of the matter. If it was his duty to go, these 
things should not be considered. But there was Mea, who had 
to be considered. After all that had come and gone between 
them, was it his duty to abandon her also ? even though the 
pure devotion and deep respect which he bore to her might 
perhaps be the real cause of much of the active repulsion 
his wife inspired in him the converse, in short, of her case 
with Dick, 

Mea, he knew, was wrapt up in him ; for his sake she had 
put away marriage and entered on the curious mode of life 
that had proved so unexpectedly happy and successful. If he 
left her, he believed that she would probably die, or would at 
least be miserable for the rest of her days. Could it be 
expected of him that because of an empty ceremony, whereof 
the other contracting [larty had at once violated the spirit, he 
must do this great wrong to a beloved woman, who had violated 
nothing except her own human impulses, which she, an Eastern, 
trod down in order that he might be able to keep to the very 
letter of his strict Western law ? 

The worst of it was that through all this terrible struggle, 






TTbe Mbeel TTurne 



3*7 






while his soul drifted upon a sea uf doubt, from Mea herself 
Rupert received not the slightest help. Whether it were 
through pride, or a stern determination to let things take their 
appointed course uninfluenced by her, she spoke no pleading 
word, she made no prayer to his pity or his love. Their life went 
on as it had gone for over seven years. They met, they talked 
they Hiinistered to the sick, they dispensed justice, they balanced 
their accounts, just as though there were no Dick and no Edith 
upon the earth. Only from time to time he caught her watching 
him with those great, faithful eyes, that were filled with wonder 
and an agony of fear. It was on his head, and his alone, and 
sometimes he felt as though his brain must give beneath the 
pressure of this ordeal. He fell back upon the principles of 
his religion ; he sought light in prayer and wrestlings ; but no 
light came. He was forsaken ; unhelped he wandered towards 
that fatal day, the day of decision. 

Richard Learmer also had been observing events, and as a 
result, found himself in sore trouble. He perceived that Edith 
was drawing nearer to Rupert. At first he had thought that 
she was actuated by self-interest only, but during the last few 
days, many signs and tokens had convinced him that some- 
thing deeper drove her on, that now the man attracted 
her, that she wished to win his love. Further, Tabitha 
had told him so outright, suggesting that the best thing he 
could do was to make himself scarce, as he was wanted by 
nobody. He had refused with a smothered oath, and gone 
away to chew the cud of his rage and jealousy. 

It was a very bitter cud. His great fortunes had passed from 
him ; they were the property of Rupert. The only creature that 
he had cared for was passing from him also ; she and her money 
were going to be the property of Rupert, in fact as well as in 
name. Of course there remained the possibility that he would 
reject her, but in this Dick did not for one moment believe. 
There was too much at stake. It was inconceivable that a man 
would throw up everything in order to remain the sheik of an 



I 



H 



jy., 



3«8 



TTbe Mai? ot tbc Spirit 



Arab tribe, a position from which he might be deposed by any 
conspiracy or accident. Doubtless he was temporising merely 
to save his face with the other woman, and to make himself 
appear of more value in the eyes of Edith. 

So Rupert was going to take e"erything and leave him 
absolutely nothing. What a difference the existence of this 
man made to him ! If he had died ! If he should chance to 
die I Then how changed would be his own future. Edith 
would soon drift back to him, after her fashion when Rupert 
was out of the way, and he, Dick, would be the master of her 
and of more wealth than even Ae could spend, the honoured 
lord of many legions, instead of a shady and discredited person 
with not a prospect on the earth, except that of the infirmary 
or the workhouse. If only a merciful Providence should be 
plea-^ed to remove this ^'.umbling-block ! 

B r ""rovidence showed no sign of stirring, '/hen why not 
help It? At first Dick shrank from the idea, to which, how- 
ever, his mind became accustomed by degrees. Just for 
annusement, he considered half-a-dozen ways in which the 
thing might be done, but sinking the morality of the 
question, put them all aside as too risky. The world 
called such deeds by an ugly name, and if they were found 
out, avenged them in a very ugly fashion. Indeed, the fate 
of anyone who was suspected of having interfered with Rupert 
in this oasis would doubtless prove particularly unpleasant. 
If was not to be thought of, but if only Fate would come 
to the rescue, could he help it if by some fortunate chance 
he were appointed its instrument ? 

The student of life may sometimes have noticed that there 
does seem to exist an evil kind of entity which, with Dick, we 
may call Fate, that is on the look-out for trustworthy tools of 
his character, and now, just in the nick of time, that Fate made 
Its bow to him. It happened thus. Dick had several natives 
with him, one of whom he had hired as a dragoman at 
Tewfikiyeh. When they started on their ride across the 



^I)c Wlbcel JLuvne 3,, 

g^dSy le^ '" ;\' ™,^ «•' -'l""g» burs,, "an/ he 

a.11,, hLk t^lieyed that he had been attacked by plague 
"Indeed," said Dick- "fh*.n t k.j 

A few n.ghts later; .t was on the seventh day after EHith 

oT fe^e^' r r tor t: H- • ™; 

Feeling that a crisis was at Td and that h'e ™ '™''"- 

Se'itKtr 'd^: r ~ '" -^ "-- - 

i"S in tltn^there e ,T ''""' '"" '' '"= '^«" "- 
which he Ce S= '0 rSd « "'"'" '="='» ""■"™ "y Edith 

Ms snence as\l enLrr^entSr ^ "^' ^ '"'- 

und^td "^cfur'ti:?'"? " °"' ™" '° ""<>«■"■ '» 

though, mysef the w. T "" " "°" **"" P°^"'°"' ' 
propfrty^u, hfh "''°°' " ■""''<"■ P""""*^' "<"* of 

P operty, but .he happy circumstance of your having survived 



330 



Vbe Tnus of tbc Spirit 



deprives me of everything. I thought also that I wm the 
proud possessor of the reversion to your wife's affections; 
indeed, she left me little doubt upon that point, for which 
of course you, who were nominally dead, cannot blame her. 
These, too, must go with the rest, since naturally Edith knows 
on which side her bread is buttered. Now I make you a 
business proposition : You provide me with what I must have, 
enough to live on — let us say, a capital sum of ;i^30o,ooo, 
which you can very well spare, and we will balance our accounts 
once and for all." 

" And if I don't ? " asked Rupert quietly, for he wished to 
get to the bottom of this man's baseness. 

" Then," answered Dick, *' I am afraid that instead of a 
sincere friend Edith and yourself will find me, let us say, a 
candid critic. There are many ill-natured and envious people 
who would be glad to read those letters, and, like the Sibylline 
books, they may go up in price." 

'• Have you them here ? " asked Rupert. 

" Do you take me for a fool," he answered, '* to trust such 
precious documents to the chances of desert travel, or possibly 
to the investigations of Arab thieves? No; they are safe 
enough in England." 

"Where you intend to use them for purposes of black- 
mail." 

" That is an ugly word, Rupert, but I will not quarrel with 
it, who, as I have remarked, must live." 

Now Rupert turned on him. 

*• I don't believe," he said, " that there is anything in your 
letters which either Edith or I need fear ; I am sure that she 
would never commit herself too far with a man like you. Dick 
Learmer, you are a villain 1 You have been at the bottom 
of all the unhappy differences between Edith and myself. 
It was you, I have discovered from Tabitha and from 
letters which have reached me, who got me sent to the 
Soudan immediately after my marriage, as I believe— God 



TTbe TObeel TCnms 331 

forgive yo-i !-in the hope that I should be killed. It was 
you, by your false inf.-rmation and plots, who subsequintly 
bUckencd my character, and as soon as I was thought to be 
dead, tried to take my wife. Now, unless you can be bought 
off, you threaten to blacken hers also, and indeed, have 
already done so to some extent. I repeat that you are a 
villain. Do what you like j I will never speak to you again," 
and lifting the palm riding switch which he held in his hand, 
Rupert struck him with it across the face. 

With a savage curse Dick snatched at his revolver. 

"Don't draw that if you value your life," said Rupert. 
"You are watched, and whether you succeed in murdering 
me or not, you will be instantly cut down. Take my advice ; 
go for a few days' shootir.g on the hills until your people can 
get the camels up from the far grazing lands, and then march. 
Be off now, and don't attempt to speak to either Edith or 
myself again, or I will have you bundled into the desert, with 
your camels or without them." 

So Dick went with a face like the face of a devil, and with a 
heart full of hate, jealousy, and the lust of vengeance. 

When he reached his house, it was reported to him that 
another of his people was very sick in a little outbuilding. 
He looked at him through the window-place, and after what 
the first man had told him— having refreshed his memory by 
reading up its symptoms in his handbook of medicine— had 
not the slightest difficulty in recognising a bad and un- 
doubted case of plague, which, doubtless, had been contracted 
from the dragoman who recovered. Now Dick made up his 
mind at once that he would take Rupert's advice and go on a 
three or four days' shooting trip. Accordingly, he gave the 
necessary orders to start an hour before the dawn; then 
he sat down and thought a while, rubbing the red mark on 
his check where Rupert's whip had struck him. 

How could he be revenged? Oh! how could he be 
revenged ? Of a sudden, a pccitive inspiration arose in his 



33* 



XTbe Mas of tbc Spirit 



mmd. Rupert was an amateur doctor ; Rupert loved attend- 
ing to the sick, and here was a case well worthy of his notice. 
Perhaps that Fate for which he had longed was appointing him, 
Dick, Its instrument. He took a piece of paper and wrote 
this note : 



A desire to help another alone induces me to communicate 
jnth you One of my men is very ill with some sort of fever. 
Under all the circumstances, I cannot stop to nurse him myself, 
as otherwise I should like to do, having, you remember, asked 
your kind leave to shoot, and made arrangements to start at 
dawn. Perhaps if you have time you will visit him and give 
him some medicine; if you do not, I fear that he must die. 

" R. L." 

Summoning the recovered dragoman who was to be left 
behind to see to the camels when they arrived, he bade him 
take this letter to Zahed as soon as the shooting expedition 
had started m the morning, and if he were questioned, to 
say that his comrade was very sick, but that he did not know 
what was the matter with him. 

" If only he would catch the plague ! " muttered Dick to 
himself between his clenched teeth. " No one could blame 
me, and he might— no, that would be too much luck " 

Before daybreak, having been informed that the man was 
apparently no worse, Dick rode away with his attendants 

Rupert duly received the letter, and about seven o'clock 
wdered his mule, and started for the place where the patient 

" Whither go you ? " asked Mea, who met him. 

vish Edlth'^^ ""^ *"'^°"'' ^°' '^^ ^^^'^'^ ^^^^ ^^ """ *^°"' *° 
"To see a sick man up yonder at Learmer's house " 
"Sol It was reported to me that he started at dawn to 



TTbc Mbcel TTums 333 

hunt buck for some days on the mountain slopes. Why 
does he not doctor his own sick, he who told me that he 
understands medicine?" 

forVou rdo. r:;::-^' '''-' ''' ^°" "°^ ^ ^ ^^-^^ **^>-"« 

"I am ashamed to say I did." he answered. "That man 
is a low fellow and a slanderer, Mea." 

"I know that also, but whom did he slander this time, the 
lady yonder, or me? Nay. I will not ask. but I say to you 

stir TT °'l^°" '^"°"^"^ ' slanderer whom you have 
struck and who wished to draw his pistol on you " 

hoi/ T} ^°" ''" ^^'' ^ "°" °^ ^" ^'^Phant. but you 
hold your head too high to see a snake. 0> what is this 

Tdo^t k ' '^^^ T ''^^ '^' ^^'^"^^ "'"- "P there" 

dol7so"?'"°"'' ''* ^''°'' '°" ''^'^ ' '^^^' *=^^«' h^^« yo" 

eJw^'VnH r "? ^^"^u °^ ^''^""' ""*^ ^ *^"'* breakfast so 
early, and he made as though he would go on 

^" One moment," she said, laying her hand upon his bridle. 
Why did you not come to visit me last evening? As our 
hours together perhaps may be few, I miss you » 

"I'll tell you," he answered, smiling. "I was engaged in 
makmg my will, which took a lot of thinking though it I 
it so V' You see, Mea. I am a very rich man now. and 
it so happens that under our law I can leave my property ts I 

w"m I r ''; ""'^"'"'^ "^ '' ^" -<^' which'le from 
whom I inhented zt could not do. Now. after that trouble 

would Tk, '"T"'"''"'"^^ '^^t "■ I ^^'' ^' ^e a" ™ay do. he 
would probably take my lands and wealth, which I did not 
wish. So as the lawyers in England wrote to me to do, I 



■ i 






334 tcbe TWUs at tbe Sptttt 

nuuie A will signed and had it witnesaed properly by four of 
r^^pTe^whTcan write, and gave it to Bakhita to Jceep for 
the p^nt Now. Mea. let me go and see this man. 

•• May I come with you ? " she asked. , .,, i^ wv 

.. Nay ; how can I tell from what he suffers. I will be back 

presently." 






CHAPTER XXIV 



RENUNCIATION 



bUcT^ h^' , ? ,'^'' ^'^'^ ^^°°^^''°*' his tongue was 

n^i; ;o6 M^ "'*[ '"^'"'"^^ *^- h'^ temperature wa. 
nearly 06. Moreover, he was passing into a stale of com" 

qu^e Ir tr' ^"P^^* "«°* '"t^ the house to mix some 
qumme for he knew not what else to give him. On the table 
a book lay open which he recognised as a medical work and 
while he mampdated the quinine and the water, his eye caught 
the heading at the top of the page. It was " kgue » tS 
gave him an idea, and he read the article CenLlv thi 
rr- --d very similar. espec.^Uy ^he hH 
swdhngs, but as personally he had never actually s^n a 

nll'oTthet ""'' T '^ ^"'^- «^ ""^^ ^he seTl 
m.n -f 11 "'^ *°^ questioned him, that same drago- 

vej weak. With a little pressure he told Rupert all • hov he 
had visited his relative who was dying of the pCrand as hi 

^oXZTJ''''. ' '''-'''' ''^''^ othefri: thelut^ 
Now Rupert was quite sure, and set about taking precautions 

^'ztzitr "-'^' '- --"-nrourd 

int'^t??.'^l^'''"' *^"* rapidly worse and he went 
« to attend to him, staying there till about two hours kter 

335 



Ml 



S3« 



Ube Was of tbe Spirit 



1 i 



i I 

! I 



when he died. After seeing to the deep burial of the body, 
Rupert went to Edith's house on his way back to the town to 
warn them of what had happened. Strolling about near it 
under her white umbrella he found Tabitha and told her the 
bad news, which personally did not alarm her. She inquired 
where Dick was, and he replied that he had gone on a hunting 
expedition, but luckily left his medicine book behind him Open 
at the article which gave him a clue. Next she asked to see 
the letter which Dick had written to Rupert, and taking it from 
his pocket, he handed it to her. Tabitha read it attentively. 

" I see, Rupert, you have quarrelled with him at last," she 
said. "Ach! what a coward that man is—" then a light 
flashed in l^er eyes, and she added: "No, I understand 
now. It is a little trick of dear Dick's ; he knows it is the 
plague, he runs away, he sends for you, he hopes that you will 
catch it Mein Gott ! he is not only a coward, he is a 
murderer; you quarrel with him— what you say?— you beat 
him ? Well, he hit you back with the plague, or try to." 

Rupert began to laugh, then checked himself and said : 

" No, Tabitha, he would scarcely be such a brute as that. 
Why! assassination is nothing to it. Anyhow, I am not afraid; 
I do not catch things." 

"You do not know the dear Dick; I do," she replied 
grimly. " Go home, Rupert, at once, burn the clothes you 
are wearing, sit in smoke, wash your?elf all over with soaps, 
do everything you can." 

"All right," he answered, "don't frighten Edith ; I will take 
precautions." 

He did, with the result that it was past two o'clock before 
he could find time for food, he who had eaten nothing since 
seven on the previous night. 

For the next three days, knowing her terror of infectious 
diseases, every morning he sent a message to Edith that 
she must not see him, but with Tabitha and, of course, 
with Mea,, he associated as before, since neither of them 



IRenunctetion 33^ 

Ts^^lirJn't""""^'- '"'"^ "^'^ •^^^ °° father 
«s^ amongst Dick's people, or elsewhere, and although his 

U was reported that he was enjoying excellent sport on the 

for^Thln^r''*:''^ ""•' "'"'^ ^^°"' *he plague, however. 
m2h M k'' *^'"'' °° ^'^ '"'"^- W'thin four days the 
mon h would be up. and he must give his answer to the «reat 

srtdV':,"'°" '" '^^ °^° '^'^ he still r ?usS to 
see, had taken a desperate step ; she had sent him a letter. 

'♦Why do you keep me away from you ?" (she wrote) "Of 
course I know that I used to be afraid of illnesses, btt^ don^ 
care any more about them now. Sometimes I think it wouM 
be a good thmg if I did catch the plague and it made an end 
of me and my wretched life. Rupert. I know you forbade me 
to speak to you about these matters until next week bu7vou 

cWeTh'/'** ' "'*^'*"'* ^''' -^ ' -" wrie upol the 
choice that you may read. Rupert. I am a miserable woman! 
as I deserve to be. for I have been very wicked. I acknow 
ledge It all now. Dick has been my curse. When I was s^ni 
qmtea child, he began to make love to me; you know how 
h^dsome and taking he was then, and Well uXr h^ 
nfluence, which for years I could never shake off. I tried 
to for I knew that he was bad. but it was no good he 
attracted me. as a magnet attracts a bit of iron. Then you 
came home and I really did admire you and respect you and 
I was very flattered that you should care for me."^ Also J wiU 
ell you all the truth. I thought that you were going to be a pee 
and wealthy and that you had a great career before you and 
I wished to be the wife of such a man. Dick of '0^ was 
funously jealous; he insulted me upon the very daylat you 
P oposed to me. and because I would not be turned frt^^ Zy 
puT>ose. he set to work to avenge himself upon us both It 
was he who gave the War Office the idea of sendmg yfu ou 



> * 



338 



TEbe Mai? of tbe Spirit 



on that wretched mission, and who afterwards took away your 
good name. 

" But, Rupert, I did not know all this at the time when you 
were supposed to be dead. I let Dick, who seemed to be 
turning out better then, regain his influence over me. That 
day on which you came home I had become secretly engaged to 
him. This will help to explain what followed. Really, I was 
out of my mind and not responsible. Afterwards, in my 
distress, I wrote Dick some foolish letters, which he has held 
over my head ever since I refused to have anything more to 
do with him. Also, I would have asked your pardon and 
tr ed to make it up with you if I had known where you were 
gone. But I did not know, and I was afraid to inquire, for 
fear of betraying the shameful facts. 

" Rupert, It is true that I have grown to hate Dick, as much 
as I once loved him, if I ever did love him. Since I have 
found out how vile and treacherous he is, that it was he who 
set to work to blacken your reputation, as afterwards he has 
done by mine, and the rest of it, I have loathed him; but he 
follows me like my shadow and threatens me. I cannot cast 
him off, and if he says things about me, and shows those letters, 
who will believe that I am innocent— I with whom my own 
husband will have nothing to do? I shall be a ruined 
woman. Even here he has followed me ; yes, and the wicked 
wretch tried to murder you, I am sure, by giving you that 
sickness. Well, thank Heaven! he seems to have failed 

there. 

"Rupert, my husband, before the God that made me, I 
tell you the honest truth. I love you now, body and soul ; it 
was only Dick that stood between us, and he is gone from me 
for ever. I am miserable because I may not be near you, and, 
if you will forgive all the past, and come back to me, no man 
in the world shall have a better wife, or one more obedient to 
his wishes. I know it is much to ask ; I know I do not 
deserve it, and I know, too, that this beautiful Udy Mea 



; 



Venundatfon 



339 



loves you, and that she is as true and good as you are. 
Ohl Rupert, Rupert, don't break my heart; don't turn me 
out to wander again in the wilderness alone. If so, I do not 
know what will happen to me, but I think that I shall go to 
the bad, like many another poor creature. At any rate, it may 
be amusing while it lasts. Rupert, be merciful, as you hope 
for mercy.— Your wife (for I suppose that I still have a right 



to sign myself so), 



' Edith." 



This letter produced a great effect upon Rupert, as its writer 
had hoped that it would do. When he received it he was 
already low-spirited, but after reading it his de|)rebsion became 
acute. The piteous way in which Edith made the best of a 
bad case; her evident and honest repentance, and the curious 
heart-change which, as she declared and as he half believed, 
now inclined her towards himself, all touched him deeply,' 
especially the repentance. 

Yet he could not but see that almost every argument she 
used might be urged with even greater effect upon behalf of 
Mea, who wrote no letters and made no prayer. Why should 
Mea's heart be broken ? Why should Mea be left to wander 
in that lonely wilderness whereof Edith spoke, or perhaps to 
take to those common courses of despair— Mea, who had 
never offended, who had always played an angel's part towards 
him? 

Of course the only answer was that he was married to Edith, 
and that he was not married to Mea ; that he had taken Edith 
for better or for worse, and that to them applied the ancient 
saying: "Those whom God has joined together, let no man 
put asunder." He knew well enough in which direction his 
own feelings lay. Yet, what right had he to thrust her out, his 
wife, whom he had asked to marry him ? On the other hand, 
what right had he to desert Mea, the woman who had saved 
and sheltered him ? 

Rupert was sore perplexed; he could find no answer to 



^1 



l|j 



340 



TTbe TRUy of tbe Spf rtt 



these problems. He wrote a note to Edith thanking her for 
her letter, the contents of which he said he was considering, 
adding that he was quite well, but she had better still keep 
away from him for a while. Then he took a sudden 
resolution. He would go to Mea, and lay the whole 
matter before her. 

Once again they sat in that room in which, after weeks of 
blindness, he had recovered his sight. His story had been 
told, the letter had been read, there it Uy upon the ground 
beside them. 

"And now, Rupert," asked Mea quietly "what shall 
you do?" i 

" I don't know," he answered passionately. " I have come 
to ask you." 

She looked at him and asked again : "Which is it that you 
love, your wife or me ? " 

"You know welV he replied. "It is you, and no other 
woman, you now and fur ever. Why do you make me tell 
you so again ? " 

"Because I like to bear it, Rupert," she said, with her slow 
smile. "But it does not make the choice easier, does it? 
On the one side, love; on the other your law. Which will 
win, love or your law ? " 

" I have come to you to tell me, Mea." 

She looked upwards as though seeking an inspiration, then 
spoke agam. 

" I will be no stumbling-block in your path of righteousness. 
Was It for this that I was given to you ? Love is longer than 
your law, Rupert, and is not that doctrine which we practise 
named Renunciation? It seems that those who would reap 
must sow." 

" What do you mean ? " he asked. 

"I mean, Rupert, that this woman who has behaved so ill 
repents, and what says our Book— the Book you taught me to 



Weimncuittoii 



.ttr'he hlJ"ktt"ts'le«er 'thir "? ^"'«^ '' '-^^^ that 
and her." ^ '"""'' ^^** °«h still stands between you 

Then I must leave von ?"!,-.«- . 
;; V«, Ruper,. I su'^ 'J' """'"^ '■'»"''^- 

His hands trembled, and »h» 
forehead. ' *""* *^® ^«"s swelled upon his 

" I can't," he said hoarselv • " r^^ e • 
ye.. You are „„b,er .hanlfWef^ '"*'" "^ ' »>''- 
inen, Rupert, what?" 

pleased to help us in some mlJ r ^^^^ ^°^ ™^y be 
end of them I will accepTyour colTeT"- '' "°*' «'^^« 
be^; yes. even if it kills us both." ^ ''""'"' '"^'^ " ™«3r 

"Good!" she answered with ,. a u ,, 
words I looked to hear y^' sp^ J '? „°^ ^^^ ^y^^' " ^"ch 
faith fly before its fires?' The 't.;!/ '''' ^'"'^^'^^^ ^^ « 

Will there be an end-.a„d?b4;°nl7 "^ '"^' ^''^ ^^"^^ 
beginX" "'• '"^'^"« ^^^ ^"«"^^. •'- end and a 

Another two days had eone hv a«^ * 
Mea sat together. They we'e l.t °"'' "°^* ^"P*«^d 
forthcoming gathering in^he L^Je ."|^^^^^^^^^^^^ .^^^ the 

an account of his stewardshio he wh« v ' ^ ^"^"^ ^er 

'S; .t::;i-L;n ft? '^= - 



il 



34a TCbe Tnuv of tbe Sptrtt 

hands upon the edge of the table and raised himself with a 
smothered exclamation of pain. 
"What is it?" she asked wildly, as he sank back into his 

seat. 

••Nothing," he answered, in a faint voice. • It was as 
though a sword passed through me, that is all." 

••Oh! Rupert," she cried, •• you are ill." 

••Yes, Mea," he said presently, •'! am ill. I think that God 
has shown us a way out of our troubles, and for that blessed be 
His name. Mea, I have the plague. Leave me; leave me 

at once." 

••Aye," she answered, setting her lips, •'when they take you 

from me dead, but never before." 

• • • • 

Two more days and Rupert was dying with the dawn. By 
his side knelt Mea, and in a chair at the end of the shadowed 
room, tears streaming down her placid face, and the grey- 
haired Bakhita crouched crooning at her feet, sat Tabitha. 
Edith was not there. Rupert had refused t \llow her to be 
admitted, lest bhe also should contract the p' .e. Sometimes 
he was cons( ious, and sometimes he sank in o sleep. His eyes 
opened, he woke again and turned to Mea. 

•• Beloved," slie whispered in his ear, " I have hidden it 
from all save Bakhita, but I have that which I must tell you at 
last. Our merciful God has called me-I die also.^^ Before 
midday I follow ( .1 your road. Wait for me, Rupert." 

He smiled, and whispered: "I understand. I will wait- 
surely -urely!" , . . a 
Then he stretched up his arms. She sank mto them, and 
for the first time their lips met. It was their kiss of farewell 

and of greeting. , 

•• Bdkhita," said Mea presently in a clear and nngmg voice, 

'•it is done. Come ; tire me in those robes that I have made 

ready, my bridal robes. Be swift now, for my lord calls 

me." 



Hcnnnctiitton 



S4S 



Tr 



The stem-faced, aged woman rose and obeyed. Tab:>.ha 
knelt in prayer by the corpse of Rupert, and messeng<.'r» 
swiftly spread the news that Zahed had departed from his 
people. A while later, as high and shrill the Eastern death- 
wail broke upon the silence, a door burst open and in 
rushed Edith. 

"Oh ! is it true, is it true?" she sobb-d. 

Tabitha pointed to the shrouded form of Rupert. 

" Come no nearer," she said, " lest you should die also— 
you who are not ready to die." 

The two women, Edith and Mea, stood face to face with 
each other ; Edith, dishevelled, weeping ; Mea, a strange and 
glorious sight in the rays of the rising sun that struck on her 
through the open window-place. She was clad in silvery robes 
that flowed about her ; in her weak hand swayed the ancient 
sceptre of her race, upon her breast lay a pectoral of Isis and 
Nepthys weeping over dead Osiris ; above her outspread hair 
was set that funeral crown worked in thin gold and enamelled 
flowers which once she had shown to Rupert. Her wide eyes 
shone like stars, and the fever that burned upon it seemed to 
give to her mysterious face a richer beauty. 

"I grnet you, lady," she said to Edith. "Well have I 
nursed our lord, but now he has passed from us— home, 
and I— I follow him," and she pointed over the shattered 
temple and the wall of mountains upwards to the splendid sky. 

" You follow him ; you follow him ! " gasped Edith. " What 
do you mean ? " 

By way of answer, Mea tore open her white wrappings and 
showed her bosom marked with those spots of plague that 
appear only just before the end. 

•' It was his last and best gift to me," she cried in Arabic. 
" Soon, very soon we two shall have done with separations and 
with griefs. Hearken you, his lady according to your law. He 
had determined that to-morrow he would have gone back 
with you whom he forgave, as I do. But we prayed, he 



A 



344 



Tlbe m$v of tbe Spirit 



and I— yet, knee by knee we prayed to our God, that He 
would save ui from this sacrifice, and He has answered to our 
prayer. Behold ! we who have followed the way of the Spirit 
inherit the Spirit ; and we who renounced, renounce no more. 
To me it was given to save his life ; to me it is given to share 
his death and all beyond it t» jugh light, through dark- 
forever and forever. 

" Way now, m?V» \<!ay for Tama who comes to her lord's 

bed!" 

Then while they gaied and wondered, with slow steps Mea 
reeled to the couch upon which the corpse of Rupert lay ; 
uttering one low cry of love and triumph, she cast herself 
beside him, and there she died. 

"Now," said the quiet voice of Tabitha, as she looked 
upward to heaven over the ruined temples of a faith fulfilled 
and the cruel mountains of our world — " now, who will deny 
there dwells One yonder that rewards the righteous and smites 
the wicked with His sword ? " 



FINIS 



Printtd by Ctwait A* C#., LimiUd, P*rth. 



I 



NEW 6s. NOVELS 



The Far Horiioa . 
The OambUr 

Queen of the Rushes . 
Ring in the New . 
Made in his Image 
In Subjection 

A Girl of Spirit . 
The Spanish Dowry 
The Artful Miss DiU . 
The House of Riddles . 
A Man of No Family . 
The Wood End 
The Only World . 
Thalassa 



Lucas Malet 

Katherine Cecil 

Thurston 
Allen Raine 

Richard Whiteing 

Guy Thome 

Ellen Thorneycroft 
Fowler 
Charles Garvice 

L. Dougall 

Frankfort Moore 

Dorothp? Gerard 

C C. .&E ; Mott 



J 



. 1 . _>ii \ .-obe 



G. B. B. I 

Mrs. Baiilie- 

Reynolds 



Mrs. Grundy's Crucifix Vincent Brown 



LONDON: HUTCHINSON 9f CO. 



'WmKP 



! 



I i 



Classic Novels 

WITH FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS BY 

GEORGE CRUIKSHANK, &c. 

InF'cap. 8to. is. 6d. net, cloth. 2s. 6d. net, leathtr. 



By Tobias Smollett 
Th« Adventures of Roderick Random 

IN ONE VOLUME 

The Expedition of Humphry Clinker 

IN ONE VOLUME 

The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle 

IN TWO VOLUMES 

Sir Launcelot Greaves; and The Adven- 
tures of an Atom 

IN ONE VOLUME 

The Adventures of Ferdinand, Count 
Fathom in one volume 

By Henry Fielding 

The History of Tom Jones, a Foundllnir 

IN TWO VOLUMES 

The Adventures of Joseph Andrews 

IN ONE volume 

The History of Amelia 

IN TWO VOLUMES 

Mr. Jonathan Wild; and A Journey 
firom This World to the Next 

IN ONE VOLUME 

By Laurence Sterne 

Tristram Shandy; and a Sentimental 
Journey through France and Italy 

IN ONI VCLUMI 






CLASSIC WnVRr s 

SOME PRESS OPINIONS. 

"The Publishers deserve the thanks of a new generation of 
readers for placing within reach some of the best examples of 
Georgian fiction in so attractive a form as this series has. The 
pnnt IS excellent, the iUustrations are faithfuUy reproduced, 
and the format is not to be surpassed even by more expensive 
editions. This series ought to have a warm welcome wherever 
the English tongue is spoken."— />a//^a// GasefU. 

« The volume before us runs to over five hundred weU-printed 
pas, s. The type is clear, the binding excellent, and, though 
trained to expect remarkably good productions at inexpensive 
prices, the publ> will marvel how such altogether admirable 
volumes can be placed in their hands so cheaply. The new 
series is sure to be a great success. It is more than value for 
the moaey:'~Oiservtr. 

"Here we have SmoUetft famous novel, • Roderick Random.- 
without expurgations or emendations, as the first instahnent of 
a new jenes the « Classic Novels.' It is beautifiiUy printed in 
dd-fash.oned type on good paper, and contains all the original 
Ml-page dlustrauons by George Cniikshank.''-£A»^, H^JU, 

"The volumes are beautifully printed on excellent paper, 
and I ttpect they will meet with that demand from the pubUc 
which they deserve."— 7i»-.Dtfy. 

given."— Aiwftw/^ CkronicU. 

"A splendid book for the money; well bound and weU 
ynoxta,*— Academy, 

"A handy edition, similar in shape to the *dear dumpy 
twelves of a bygone time. They are very well printed and 
neatly bound.- -MamcJktsltr GiMrdiam. 



44 



1 1 i 



Ritii.*s" Novels. 



••*Rte' flrat, aad other niMtera of fiction nowhera."— 7-iVnm. 

New Novels by "RITA." 
In crown 8vo, cloth gilt. es. each. 

THE MAagUERADERS. 

THE JE8TER8. 
THE SILENT WOMAN. 



Hew and Worm Edition of 'RITA'S' HOVELS. 

In nown tro, baadMni* etotb gilt, prloe S/c taeh. 

80UL8. 

AN OLD ROGUE'S TRAGEDY. 

A WOMAN OF SAMARIA. 
PETTICOAT LOOSE. 
A WOMAN IN IT. 
PEQ THE RAKE. 

THE SINNER. 
QRETOHEN. 
KITTY THE RAa 

ADRIENNE : A Romanoe of FrMioh Life. 



London : HUTCHINSON ft 00., PfttonoiUr Bow. 



u. 



NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION OF 

Frankfort Moore's Popular Novels. 

Eaeh in Crown Svo, uniform binding, cloth pit, 33. 6A 



>. 



M 



MTELl* AFTER ALL—. 

.llk^™"* J?': ^"""ort Mo""'! •tone, will not be diappointed 
'•liSi: ^71°i^f 1 ^Z*"'' "'* °°''' " ingeniou. and cleverly written, 

PHYLLIS OF PHILISTIA. 

.fcVJ?^*" ■ ^^«™ »io»y. not beneath the itandard of merit to 
which we ue accuitomed in the ymMa^-Athimaum. 

J^^if ^^"^ P*8* 1° ^^ book on which there is not something 

^ fefi ^k • i: ^5' '^'^ !» uncommonly weU worth reading, it b 
^n^-^oS^ 'MffiMtion, though iu style is so sparkli^ and 

THE MILLIONAIRES. 

IVm Illuttratiom by MemrUt Griefmhagen. 

^i^.^''^/"!^^* ^^V: *"" ^"^n another clever and convincing 
olcture of sodetvwith all his accustomed wit. ... A powerful and 
.^IsTl"*"^'- ^* ""J'^" ^ » '*>« distinction of never Saving drawn 
b S.riSr.^M*'' wT' " t 'J^'ltling « ever, and the theme 
tt onginal and thoughtfuf enough to place the book in the same 
category as •! Forbid the Banns' and 'One Fair Daughter."' 

—Daily TtUgraph. 

ACCORDING TO PLATO. 

" Mr. Frankfort Moore is always entertaining, and he seems to ua to 
»wJI!I!" •"♦•Gaining than w* remember him before ... full of good 
uungfc Md wc oordiaUr leoonmead U to oar rwwlers."— Z>a»^ Nrmt. 



1 1 



lill 

I 



New Vokimet of the very tueeetsful 

LIBRARY OF STANDARD 
BIOGRAPHIES 

Each in fcap 9vo, with Frontispiece Portrait, Appendix, Chronology, 

Notes and full Index, printed from entirely new type on special 

P<^Ptr, 3S0 to 400 pp. 

In cloth gilt, Ib. net. In full limp lambskin, richly gilt 

and gilt top, 2%. net. 

The Life of Samuel Johnson 

By JAMES BOSWELL 

With Portraits and facsimiles. Abridged and Edited 
by RjOGER Ingpen. 

Memoirs of Marie Antoinette 

By MADAME CAMPAN 
With Portrait. Edited by A. R. Waller. 

Memoirs of Benvenuto Oelllnl 

Written by himself. Edited by A. R. Waller and 

LUIGI RiCCL 



Volumes already issued. 

The Life of Napoleon [Third Edition 

From the French of DE BOURRIENNE 

The Life of John Wesley [Second Edition 

By ROBERT SOUTHEY 

The Life of Nelson By ROBERT southey 
The Life of Qoidsmlth By JOHN FORSTER 



Library of Staadard BiognphitM—Conhnued. 






Th« Autobiography of Benjamin 
Franiclln 

SJ?pvfc %^'*'^^°" ?^ ^" Abridgment of GARED 
oi'AK.KS Continuation. 

The Life of Robert Burne 

By J. G. LOCKHART 

With the addition of Carlyle's "Essay on Bums." 
Edited by J. M. Sloan. 

The Life of Thomas Arnold 

(Dr. Arnold, of Rugby) By DEAN STANLEY 

U-dited and Abridged by Arthur Reynolds, M.A. 

The Life of Queen Elizabeth 

By AGNES STRICKLAND 
Edited and Abridged by L A. Taylor. 

The Life of Sir Walter Scott 

By J. G. LOCKHART 
Edited and Abridged by J. M. Sloan. 

The Life of Wellln^on 

By W. H. MAXWELL 
Edited and Abridged by the Rev. L. T. Dodd. 

The Early Life of Goethe 

(Books I,— IX, of the Autobiography) 
Edited by W. von Knoblauch. 

The Life of Oliver Cromwell 

By THOMAS CARLYLE 

With a portrait. Abridged and Edited by Edgar 
Sanderson, M.A. 



LONDON: HUTCHINSON & GO. 



Hutchinson's Select Novc 

Eaeh in erown Sve, uniform bituUng, elotk, rieklygilt, 3a. 64 
By RICHARD WHITEING 

THE YELLOW VAN 

By ELLEN THORNEYCROPT FOWLER 

PLACE AND POWER 

By JEROME K. JEROME 

PAUL KELVER 



THSDHBBITAaB OF LANQDAIiB 

A SBCOND IjIFB 

IN HIGH PLA0B8 

A MABBIAQB OBBBMONT 

FIDBUS 

DR. LUTTBBIiL'8 FIRST PATXB27T 

MOUilB'S PRINOB 

lilFB'S TRIVIAL ROUND 

MY LADY FRIVOL 

ORIF 

TATTBRLBY 

BARS THB IMPOS8IBLB 

THB BANI8HMBNT OF JBSSOP BLYTHB 

WOMAN AND THB SHADOW 

THB LOVB OF RICHARD HBBBIOK 

BY BIGHT OF SWOBD 

A DASH FOB A THRONB 

A STUMBLBR IN WIDB SHOBS 

AT THB OBOSS ROADS 

INTO THB HIGHWAYS AND HBDGBS 

THB ONB WHO LOOKBD ON 

THB VBNOB ANCB OF JAMBS VANSITTART 

A HOnSB IN BLOOMSBUBY 

A WBLSH SINGBB 

A WELSH WITCH 

TOBN SAILS 

BY BEBWBN BANKS 

GABTHOWBN 

THB STORY OF AN AFBIOAN FARM 

ROGBR VANBRUGH'S WIFB 

THB IDOL-MAKEB 

THB MISTRBS8 OF QUBST 

THB MINISTER OF STATB 

A CORNER OF THB WEST Bdith 

A DOUBLE THBBAD Ellra 

THB FABBINGDONS EUm 



Mn. Al«ud( 
Mn. Alezaadt 
M. E. Bnddo 
Ada Cambrtdi 
Ad* Cunbridi 
Bow N. Cure: 
Bom 2?'. Cue] 
Bon N. C>n] 
Bom N. Om«: 
B. t. Tujww 
Tom Oallon 
Suab Oiud 
JoMph H»ttoi 
AnbelU Km< 
AtabelU Kena 
A. W, Muohn 
A. W. llarohi 

E. SntoUffe Mi 

F. F. Montite 
F. F. Montrto 
F. F. Montr^ 
Mn. J. H. N« 
Mrs. OUptauit 
Allen Baine 
Allen Balne 
Allen Balne 
Allen Baine 
Allen Balne 
Olive Schrelne 
Adeline Sergei 
Adeline Sergei 
Adeline Sergei 
J. A, Stemurt 
Henrietta Fowl 
Tliomeyeroft F< 
ThoneTenrft Fi 



lovels 



t, Sa. 6d. 



LER 



. Alnandmr 
AlezudM 
B. Bnddon 
Cunbridf* 
Cunbild(e 
I N. Ctxtj 
i 2?. Guar 
t N. Ctrajr 
k N. Ouajr 
1. Iftxiwon 
I Oallon 
lb Orud 
ph H»tton 
tell* Kmtaly 
>ell» Kenwly 
V. MwehmoBt 
V. Marchmont 
utoUffe Maich 
'. Monti^ior 
'. Montr^Mr 
'. Montr^r 
J. H. NeedeU 
OUphMit 
1 Baine 
1 Balne 
1 Baine 
1 Baine 
a Baine 
I Schreiner 
ine Sergeant 
ine Sergeant 
Ine Sergeant 
. St«murt 
letta Fowlet 
leyeroft Fowler 
wjenrft Fowler 



34,3SSJ6, PATERNOSTER ROW, 

LONDON. February, 1906. 



MggsjgiJjut d^^ C a^s 

l2 LJlg-Sp^ring of 1906 . . 

Robert Owen 



By FRANK PODMORB 

Author of "Modern SpirUualism." - studie. in Psychical Re^arch." .tc. 

In 2 vols., demy 8vo, cloth gilt and gilt top. 34s. net 
With numerous illustrations 

The present book constitutes the first serious attempt to recount in 
;t8 entirety the life-histor, of Robert Owen the great So^i^i^iu! 

felt W / Co-oP«'^t'Ve movement, and the need has long been 

^^neo'lthT*!,"'^""'^^*'^ ^**»"— "-• Pod»o4.^; 
h^ m^:^'.: ^""^-•o' «•« P-Wan Society, ha, had access t^ and 
letter ** * "^"^"^'y discovered coUection of unpubliaZ 

Ietter.-«,„,e 3.000 in number-written by or to. Owen ^"""^^ 



Carthage and Tunis 






THE OLD AND NEW GATES OF THE ORIENT 
By D0UaLA5 SLADEN 

Author of •'Th« Jap* at Home," "Queer Thing* about Japwi, 
" In Sicily," etc., etc. 

With OTer 100 UlnstntioBi on Irt papw prineipAlly from 

photogn^phi, and inoladlnl Biz Coloured PUtoi from 

drawings by Mr. Benton Fletcher. 

In 2 wo/5., demy Svo, cloth gilt and gilt top. 248. net. 

This is a book which should find many publics. Scholarship must 
always be a factor in a book which includes Carthage, and this 
Mr. Sladen, who won an open Scholarship at Trinity College, and 
was once a professor In an Australian University, possesses; though like 
Mr. Lang he sometimes venU his knowledp- in jests and advances his 
theories in banter. 4 

Mr. Sladen. whose books about Japan have sold to the extent of 
two hundred thousand copies, is well-known to be enamoured of the 
Orient, and it is easy to see. as far as Art goes, that the Near East is 
more picturesque to him than the Far East, that his heart rests at the 
Gate of the Orient. The Gates of the Orient in this book are Tunis 
the New Gate, and Carthage the Old. Tunis, Mr. Sladen paints in 
words in the manner in which he has dealt with the " Queer Things 
About Sicily," the writing in which has thus been described by a 
London Weekly. ' ' It brims over with cynical fun and racy with shrewd 
observation and acute understanding. It is written gaily and intimately, 
and has that personal note which makes each chapter read like a letter 
from a personal friend who had in some wonderful way learned how to 
write letters as they should be written," 

But in Carthage he opens a new vein— romantic and scholarly 
expressed in what another critic has called "the speaking voice," 
which h iS won his travel books their popularity. He has the same 
tenderness and enthusiasm, the same wealth of allusion for Hannibal 
the greatest of soldiers, as for the lovable saints ' Carthage, 
Augustine and Monica, Cyprian and Perpetua. Such a • human 
Carthage hn*? not been yet put before the public. 

To add to the varied attractions of this book, sportsmen will find 
a lengthy and exhaustive chapter on "Sport in Tunisia," and advice 
on taking caravans up into the interior by Mr. J. I. 8. Whitaker. 
F.Z.S., author of "The Birds of Tunisia," whose natural history 
museum in the grounds of his magnificent villa at Palermo is known to 
every lover of natural history who visits Sicily. Mr. Whitaker has 
been camping out and shooting in Tunisia for ten years past. 



An Important Work 

By Sir HARRY J0HN5T0N. a.C.M.a., K.C.B., etc. 

Author of "Tht Uganda ProtcctoraU," etc (4th thousand). 



LIBERIA 



THE NEGRO REPUBLIC 
IN WEST AFRICA 



With nearly 100 lUnBtrationf /rom original drawings and 
bhotographs by the Author and others 

A large number of plates of botanical subjects and maps specially 
drawn for the work under the author's instructions, and 

M eoloared pUtet fipom th« Mthop'i own paintings. 

In 2 vols., super royal Svo, cloth gilt and gilt top, with Author's 
designed end-papers in colour 

£a as. fM« 

la this work Sir Harry Johnston has endeavoured to describe Liberia 
in the manner in which he some time since described the Uganda Pro- 
tectorate. The book is based on visits to the Liberian Coastland in i88a, 
1885, 1888, 1904, and the present year The volumes are printed on the 
finest art-paper, and every help is given to the beautiful and interesting 
pictures which the Author has supplied. The Republic of Liberia, 
is little known to the general public, yet it is by no means the 
least interesting portion of the African continent. Founded some eight>' 
years ago asa settlement for American negroes, the constitution was, 
in 1847, modelled on that of the I'nitea Itates. Sir Harry Johnston 
deals with his subject exhaustively, and the history of the State is 
brought down to the present year, 1906. The linguistic studies and 
vocabularies will form an intet^sting addition to African philology and 
special attention is given to the sources and production of rubber, thus 
rendering the work of interest in commercial circles. The book cannot 
fail to be unusually attractive. 



liny 



Antoinette Sterling 
and other Celebrities 

By M. STERLINQ MacKINLAY, M.A. 

In demy Bvo, cloth gilt and gilt top, with 16 iUustrationa, and 
inttretting /acaimiUi in th4 text, 1 6s. n«t 

Mr. MacKinlay, who is the ■on of the late Madame Antoinette 
Sterling, devotes a good ehare of his book to his reminiscences of his 
mother, and it will, undoubtedly, please a large number of her admirers 
to have this record of her life ; but Mr. MacKuilay, who is so well 
known in the Musical world, has many personal recollections and many 
anecdotes to tell of other celebrities, not only in the Musical world, but 
also in the world of Literature and Art. One of the most interesting 
portions of the book deals with Manuel Garcia, who, notwithstanding 
his great age, kindly assisted the author with these chapters. A 
portion of an interkating music manuscript, written by him at the 
age of 95, will be reproduced in the book, as well as the painting of 
him at the age of loo, by J. S. Sargeant. The Author has met 6o 
many celebrated men and women of whom he has something to say, that 
it is impossible to give anything like an adequate list of them ; but 
they include some of the great artists, actors, singers, writers, and 
scientists of the present day. The book is written in a light and 
popular style, and will be of especial interest to library readers. 



The Real Louis the XV* 

By Ueut.-Coionel ANDREW C. P. HAQQARD, D.S.O. 

Author of " Sidelights on the Court of France." " Louis XIV in Court 
and Camp." "The Regent of the Route," etc. 

In a vols, demy Qvo, cloth gilt and gilt top, with 32 page illustrations 
and 2 photogravure frontispieces, 245. net 

In his Ust book, "The Regent of the Rouis," Cidonel Haggard 
successfully dealt with the period of the infancy of Louis the XVth and 
the R^ency of the Duke of Orleans. In his present volumes the whole 
of the subsequent Life and Reign of Louis XVth are treated of in the 
popular and instructive manner which have made the earlier volumes 
of the Author's Memoirs of Old Prance so attractive. " The Regent 
of the Rou<s," has already gone into a second edition, and the great 
■cope v^kh the Court of Louis the XVth affords has enabled Colonel 
Haggard to produce two volumes of moat exceptional interest, which 
are certain to be widely read. 

i 



nd 



lette 
f his 
irers 

well 
Dany 
, but 
■ting 
iding 
). A 
: the 
ngof 
et 8o 

that 
; but 

and 

and 



From the Yalu to Port Arthur 

By WILLIAM MAXWELL 

Authored "With th.Oph,rRo«„ath,E«pi«,. 

Mr. Maxwell it the well knn.... 
Japanese force, on behrf of th?^'^r'':"P°"^*"* ^'''° J-^'ned the 
*»ndent in India for thrDa,7%fr1i '."?'' ""'' '* "^^ --e 
ranted to him. and in hi. Pre ace da n,.^^ ^.^ "'"^ 'P'^'^' '««='«ti" 
pondent who wa. with GeneAl KurollT f ''* ^°" *''«= ^"'y «=orre. 
«•« with his inten^reter. .^ to. h^ 1^7,^;^"'"/° ''' ^'^''°' ^'^ 
American, or Japanese, Sresent Jt J '^ oftscrvcr. European 

assaults upon ana sur^aTlf p'/ZT./"'^"*''"^'*'' ""^^ '''" *^ 
"«ny favour, .hown ^JZ c.^^^^^^^^^ 

gave him much valuable informat'n tS'nf"' °' ^'''^ S*-*^' -"o 
t'me. He ha., therefore, much to7,'.i ^- .. "^ ^P^^nr^ for the first 
and hi. book i. written ^ welUhat f ^^'t ^'" ^ ""^'"t^'y freiJ 
« piece of Uterature. J^aTso contV- ' ^ ^'^^^ ^°' '»• "•"•JT.; 
RuMian and Japane« armfes^vhrh * '" *•" "PP*"*^' «"d'« o the 
before the war.'and ^TZ:^:t:Z\:^-^ -^ ^^'^^n,^4lX 
have a professional interest inSl^^c 'nee """*'°" °' -" ^»'° 



tons 

gard 
and 
^hole 
1 the 
Limes 
sgent 
{rcat 
looel 
rhich 



The Art Crafts for Beginners 

By FRANK O. SANPORD 

Sguare fooUcap 8vo, cloth. 35. Jj. ni^ 

The subjects dealt vHth a~ i?L^ *° ^.''oo' conditions. * 

g'-aphy, Sheet Metal WorrSJlw„^'«^2' ^*"" Woodworking, Pv. ,. 
and Bead Work. ^' ^^'I'bmdmg, Simple Pottery, Baskft w'o,^ 

-••e gfven oftrthe SSfs^SX^^tf ^'^'l'"* 2*^««- Clear diagram.' 
that no reader be wV^f^^ ^'"' ""*• method* of ugij,_ thtSr™* 
mstructions. ' ^ ^^ '^^^^ "*" 'nexperienced. can f.,il to loUotT'the 



Memoirs of Malakoff 

Edited by R. M. JOHNSTON 

Author ©» "Th« N«pol«onio Btnplr* in 8outh«m Italy." 
"The Roman ThMoner and «»• ItoiwbUo. 1»4»-1M9." ttc 

tn a volum$t, tUmy Bvo, cloth gilt and gilt top, with photogravur$ 
/roHti$pi$c«, a4«> »«< 

.. MaliOcoff " wa. the n.me a«umed by Mr. W. E-Johnaton during 
hlareaidence in Pari., where he acted a. '^"**P°'''^^'':,*^,;^^^"\ 
iSierican journal. The book i. largely made up °^ ";• ^f ^J*"" J 
l^era to hi. paper, and it cover, the whole period of the Second 
Sip^rintere'tilfg account, being given of ^»'«V»'«PP«"*^' P°^ ["i J 
.ndV«ially. during thi. period. They are written in an intimate 
mannTfo; Mr.' Johnaton wa. mixed up. direcUy o*- '" Jjf y- 
Tmoat of the doing, of the time which, of course. ">«=»"J,^ »?« 
SvU War of i860, the Siege of Pari, and the Commune. He alw 
S« a g<Si deal to «y on the Panama Canal Scheme In o«ler^at 
Se volume, may be eaaily read Mr. John.ton'. wn, Mr. R. M. Johnrton. 
f«S Ji. father'. corre.pondenc.. and added the neceMary con- 
necting link, to make the narrative complete. 



Twenty-Seventh Annual Issue 

The Times of February 3rd. 1905. «iy«:-"Thi. indispensable 
handbook well maintain, it. character." 

The Year's Art, 1906 

A Concise Epitome of aU matters relating to the Art. of 
painting, sculpture, engraving and architecture, and to school, of 
deaign, which have occurred during the year 1905. together with 
information respecting the events of the year 1906. 
Compiled by A. C R. CARTER 

In crown 8vo, cloth, 570 pages of letterpress wtthfull-page 

illustrations, including a collotype reproduction of 

the famous Rokeby Velasquez. 3s. 6d. net 

The Tribune. 8th February. i9o6..»*y»:-"^3:,^*»^P*'"*"* *° 
anyone interested in art and artisU. 

e 



rt 



jring 
tding 
ton'a 
icond 
ically 
mate 
ectly, 
I the 
also 
•that 
itton, 
r coo- 



' 



laable 



rta of 

lolt of 
r with 



By the Waters of Ca'lhage 

By NORMA LOWf;r.t;R 

Author of "By tlM H'ateri .,? S.cll,." .to. 

t3s. ntt 

Mill Norma Lorimer^, ' By the \Va»^r« «» n^^t. .. . . 
■ame vein aa the author's luX Wflter! of «° i^r*'l''8e'' i« in the 
thoutand copie. were i,M .n^h countri iJV^'- °' "^^'"^ •«^*'-«» 
of an enthu.ia.tic welconr. it ., ^ven S^t .V"?'*'^-' ■"«**»> •"« 
with a most intereitir- count,' • ik. 7,',- ''•"^"•a«d. -nd it deals 
Water, of Carthage" i loM n ' a M^ . 'ofi'T'"'' '"'"'?'*• " »y »he 
Doris who won A^^ .« h ' ero "o/ oi' rw 7'"*? i^y.*"" 
She IS spend ns her sorinff in ramhi \, I "^ ' * ^ "^^^^ «' Sicily." 
type of ?he oSenUl 5ty fnd the u fst'o.r.r"*' '*'"* T"* P**^*^* 
historical site, in history Thcbooki.Ln^fM"'' *""' °' *''* "">»* 
life and the romance o7 the fall of rL /i, 'll'' oinance of Arab 

imagines that he has only found «..!„afi^r*=^; ''"* "'* '•"«1«'- «'»'o 
book of travel will bJ SiSaken ^^ 1T^ V''^"^' ""** illuminating 
tragedy nmning through" the tra^'irfv^^ "kL"''^."^^ »"<! ■ ««'* 

pubSi ih." ™^^li'„^^"J7ll°"iln''5r" "■• ~ ■-.■ 

Garden of Allah " p«r*k- ui ""'•'■ published last year, " ' *m. 

with TMahon^iL ar^^^eS Xe i^^^^^^ "'"'■'■"«/ *>' " Christii^ 

African romance thMthlor^TI^rJo**'''*' P^''?" "'"'" Lorimer's 
Hichens's book. P«>blems of Roman Catholicism were of Mr. 



The Standard Operas 



THEIR PLOTS: THEIR MUSIC. AND THEIR COMPO.BM 
By QEORQE P. UPTON 

Author of " Standard Oratorio.," etc. 

In small crown 8vo, cloth gilt and gilt top, 35. 6d. net 

musiSin.7ti:l;nicSe.''E''? '°'' '^^T^^^'^l P"''''*^ '"^'her than for 



I 



NEW VOLUMES OP 

The Library of Standard Biographies 

Bach with {ront»piece portrait, newly edited with notes, 
chronological table, and index 
890-640/*. in fooUcap Bvo, cloth gilt, is. net p*r volum* 
Limp leather, richly gilt and gilt top, M, net per volume 
The Pall Mall Gaaette lays: " IMessrs. Hutchinaon'a • Library of 
Standard Biographies ' is the cheapest and best venture at popularising 
good biographies that has yet been attempted. The publishers, printers, 
and binders are all to be congratulated on an excellent enterprise." 
•' An argument against free libraries." — Sphere. 
"Considering the qualities of the paper, the printing, and the 
binding, the claim that ^lis is • the best value ever offered to the public 
is fully maintained."— l.ttf*. .. ,_ _. ^ 

• ' A most admirable series. I n this age of marvellous cheap reprints, 
this series stands ou% as an illustration of compactness, neatness, good 
printing, good paper, and excellent binding. The ' Library of Standard 
Biographies' was an excellent idea, and has been excellently weU 
executed. ' '—To-Day . 

THE LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON 

By Jambs BoswBLL. With two p« its and facsimiles. Abridged 
and edited by Roobr Inopbn. 51.. . «^es. 

MEMOIRS OF BENVENUTO CELLINI 

Written by himself, and translated by Thomas Roscob, 

with notes, index, chronological tables and 

Portrait. 528 pages. 

MEMOIRS OF MARIE ANTOINETTE 

By Madame Ca.mpan. With biographical notice of Madame Campan 
by F. BAKiuilRB, and with notes, index and portrait. 508 pages. 
Other volumes in the series are : — 



THE MBMOIMS OP NAPOLEON 
BONAPARTE. 6thimpriuten 
Prom the French of F. db Bour- 
aiBiiHS. 



THE LIPB OP JOHN WE5LEY. 

By Rossar Southbv. , , , 

4tk imprmtcn 

THE LIPB OP NELSON. 

By Roasirr Soutmsy.^ , . ^ 

3r4 tmfrisaton 

THE UPB el OLIVER OOLDSMITH 
By JoHH FoRiTBR. ind imfruMion 

THE LIPB OP ROBERT BURNS. 
By John Gibsoh Lockhart. 

THE UPB of QUEEN ELIZABETH. 

By AONBS SnUOKLAND. 

other volumes in preparation 



THE LIPE rt SIR WALTER SCOTT. 

By John OistCN Locxhart. 

THE LIPE OP WELLINQTON. 

By W. H. Maxwbll. 

THE AUTOBIoaRAPHY OP^, .^ 
BENJAMIN PRANKLIN. 

To which it added Jarbd Sparks' 
continuation. 

THE LIPE OP THOMAS ARNOLD, 
D.D. 
Ay Arthur PBMaHYN Stanlby. 

THE EARLY UPB OP GOETHE. 

Books I.— IX.of tha AutobioirRphy. 

THE LIPEof OLIVERCROMWELL 

By Thohas Cablvlb. 



•'MS5i?«EllMr'*n*-?-i„ - . 



Five Fair Sisters 

AN ITALIAN EPISODE AT THE COURT OF LOUIS XIV. 
By H. NOEL WILLIAMS 

Author of " Madame Rccamicr and her Friend* " " M.<1..». M.n 

" Marfam. A^ M« T rrienoa, Madame de Pompadour." 

Madame de Monteepan. Madpme du Barry " 

Queen* of the French Stage." etc. 

In demy 8vo, cloth gilt and gilt top. 
W%th i6 illustrations and a photogravure plate, 1 68. net 

«ory%?ii^^,^f uS:* ^Z^V^'. W- Noel William, tell, the 

Mancini. the celebSted nTece, ^oT'^krl^ni?' M '"^*"'* ^"'* Marianne 

Rome to Prance aTchildren all flv« io^ i^^f*""- ^"'"g^* ^o™ 

with the exception of th2Tde,f,twJo diei"'at T'"'""**'' ••°f' 

early age. all had the most romanti^ carwrs rJ/rhL*'""''*™*'^' 

of LouT, XIV and Marie Mancin whfrh k » , charming romancf 

opposition of Mazarin would CnHoy.hf^'i ''u* '"^ **•* determin^ 

biioming Queen of Ka;icrr,rett.?**'^ *" Marie 

the greatest possible ^ntSsi l^arirJ''"^* ■'.*"'' ^'" ^ '°»°d o* 

carelrsof the clever and unMruoulousS^lJ;^^* 'ntere,t attache, to the 

" a woman formed for grea?S« wh^^^*^ (Comtesse de Soi,«,n,), 

in the Palace of the cSsars^f ih^ v!.-*""* P'«e would have been 

Marianne (Duchess de BouUlonwio ZTnl" °^ *'"' Borgia,"; of 

the fkmou. Poison Trials in S- a „^' Ti ?'y"JP«' was implicated in 

de Mazarin). wh^ flJd from heH^klous tndwJTX^T^",^ (Duchesse 

thorfughnSi^ rSrch «S.7c?^^^^^^^ '" 'ii** volume tK^m. 

of treatment which diSfng^^iTaUhli'S' ""''"*'* ^•*'' "«'^*"*" 



The Tree of Life 



By ERNE5T CRAWLEV, M.A. 

Author of " The Mystic Rose." 
In demy Bvo, cloth gilt, las. net 

andil^SfJ^lIjUjlSrllhtlJ?"^' '■'•^'T^^ "•'" ^^'^'^'^d 
of its subject It will be ,^^rl3 • f ' 'earning in the modern literature 

•• Thi^der w U end^uch fhT.^''"' r*^ ad-antage."_Sco/,m«,. 
is a vali.ahirV.Vw.* -u ^- ""*^" *""* '8 mstructive and sussestive Ii- 
o' riS n^"*"**"*"*" *° **•= "o^^*-" efforts to found thfS^d^ces 
CcJS?;°" °" " '°°'"' P«'-"«°e«t and rational b.«,."-lrSS«S 



isMs^m»'ms^':-'wmfWBif!t^m 



A Deathless Story 



or. ''THE BIRKE^KBAD" 
AND ITS HBROB8 

By A. C. ADDISON and W. H. MATTHEWS 

In demy 8vo, cloth gilt, with 64 illustrations on art paper and other 

illustrations in the text, 6s. net, and with gilt top specially 

bound, I OS. 6d. nett. 

A few years since, Mr. Addison wrote ♦he " Story of the Birken- 
head," which was successfully published. The issue of this book 
had the effect of bringing to the author a liuf e amount of fresh 
informatk>n from many people who were acquainted with the circum- 
stances of the wreck, and also further interesting particulars from 
some of the survivors. A great many new pictures were also forth 
coming to illustrate the work, and it has been decided to publish this 
revised and enlarged, and practically re-written edition of the book, 
which will really give the last word on an event which can only be 
described as the finest example of discipline, courage, and self-sacriflce 
to be found in naval history. The book has been warmly commended 
by Lord Wolseley, who hopes "that it may reach the barrack- 
rooms of every regiment in the King's Army." It marshalls all the 
documents bearing on the subject, including the narratives of survivors, 
and every reliable source of information has been tapped to make the 
book absolutely an accurate presentation of the whole circumstances of 
the •' Birkenhead's" last voyage. 



Legends of the Madonna 



AS REPRESENTED IN THE FINE ARTS. 
By Mrs. JAME50N 

With nearly 200 Illastrations including 29/ullpagt* printed 

on art paper, and veith indexes and appendix 

In cloth gilt, as. 6d. net. In leather, 3s. 66. net. 

Mrs. Jameson says : " Through all the most beautiful and precious 
productions or human genius which the Middle ages and the renaissance 
have bequeathed to us we trace . . . one prevailing idea ; it is that 
of an impersonation in the feminine character of beneficence, purity 
and power, standing between an offended Deity and poor suffering 
humanity, and clothed in the visible form of Mary, the mother of 
our Lord." 

m 



France in the XIX^^ Century 

A .. °^..^- WORMELEY LATIMER 

Author of Russia uid Turkey." " Italy. • ■' Spain." etc. 

In demy 8vo, cloth gilt and gilt top 

With 22 full-page portraits, lag. 6d. uct 

r. :ssr«;i"r^,r,,r "- •"■■^ " "- •*" -- -•" »' 



NEW VOLUME OF 

THE "CLASSIC" NOVELS 

L.mp leather, gilt and gilt top, ag. 64. n<?# per vol. 
The Novels of LAURENCE STEV^E 

Complete in one volume. 

Tristram Shandy and 
A Sentimental Journey 

With Illustrations bp QEORQE CRUIK5HANK 

Both unabridged and comprnmg together 762 pages 

VQlumei mineay tsuaea 



rm nmiftn opTOiH joNet. 

iVats 

THE ADyBNlimBS OP JO«BPH 
ANtmBWS. 1 Vol 

THBHISTORVOPAMeuA. 9 Vol.. 
M«. JONATHAN WILD AND A 

JOVRNBV PROM Tni5 WORLD 

TO THE NEXT. 1 V«l. 



By TOBIAS SMOLLETT: 

THE ADVENTURES OP 

RODERICK RANDOM, i vol. 

TMB ADVENTtRfcS OF 

PeREOBINE PICKLE. 3 Vols. 

THE EXPEDITION OF 

HUMPHRY CLINKER. 1 Vol. 

the adventures op 
Ferdinand count fathom. 

1 VcJ. 

5IR LAUNCELO'i OREAVES- 
AND THE ADVENTURES OP 
A** ATQSL ' «-> 



''"^5v» 



Messrs. HUTCHINSON ft CO. have pleasure in announcing 
for immediate issue a series of books, selected from the various 
fields of literature which have been recognized as the best books 
of their kind. They are unabridged* printed from the best editions 
and furnished with biographical matter, notes, indexes where 
necessary, bibliography, etc., and they are produced in excellent 
style, with clear type on good paper, and neatly bound. The size 
is a convenient one for handling and for the bookcase, and the 
books arc published at an unprecedentedly low price. They are 
a marvel of cheapness. 

The following are the first volumes of what will be known as 

HUTCHINSON'S 

POPULAR CLASSICS 

Each volume cloth gilt, size 7X4J, with designed title page and 
frontispiece, some with numerous illustrations, lod. net 

In full lambskin leather, richly gilt, is. 6d. net 

SCIENCE 

1. DARWIN'S ORIGIN OF SPECIES. With diagram and portrait, and 

with note by J. W. Mathews, B.A., summarizing the develop- 
ment of the Darwinian Theory since 1859, and also glossary. 
488 pages. 

FICTION 

2. BRET HARTE'S CHOICE TALES AND VERSE. 423 pages. 

3. LYTTON'S LAST DAYS OF POMPEII. 487 pages. 

TRAVEL 

4. WATERTON'S WANDERINGS IN SOUTH AMERICA. With sketch 

map, notes, and biographical data, by W. A. Harding, F.Z.S., 
and with portrait and illustrations. 259 pages. 

BELLES LETTRES 

5. LEIGH HUNT'S THE TOWN. With 30 illustrations. 626 pages. 

POETRY 

6 ROBERT BROWNING'S POEMS. Vol. I., 574 pages. With portrait. 

7. ROBERT BROWNING'S POEMS. Vol. II., 635 pages. Ditto. 

8 AN ANTHOLOGY OF HUMOUROUS VERSE. Edited by Theodore 
A. Cook, including many copyright poems. 343 pages. 



FORTHCOMING VOLUMES OF 

Hutchinson's Popular Classics 



9- 

lO. 

II. 



13. 

H- 
15- 

16. 

!?■ 
18. 

20. 

21. 
22. 

23- 
24- 
^5- 

26. 

27- 
28. 

29. 

30. 

31- 



j vok 



KEBLB'S CHRISTIAN YEAR. With illustrations. 

^' "JvK ^^^^^ CLOWES'S FOUR MODERN NAVAL CAMPAIGNS. 

With 16 maps and plans. 

THE SATIRES AND EPISTLES OF HORACE. In Latin and 
enghsh. The English version by Philip Francis. The Latiu 
text based on that of Muller's is edited by Mr. W. H. D Rouse 
foiroerly Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, who has also 
added an mdex of names. 

CHARLES DICKENS'S CHRISTMAS BOOKS. 

HAMILTON'S MEMOIRS OF THE COUNT DE GRAMMO..r. 

SHERIDAN'S COMPLETE PLAYS. 

GOLDSMITH'S VICAR OF WAKEFIELD and t m one 

ADDISON AND STEELE'S SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY ' ^"'""^ 

GOETHE'S FAUST (Anster's Translation). 

THE POEMS OF RICHARD LOVELACE. 

DORAN'S MONARCHS' RETIRED FROM BUSINESS. Vol. i 

DORAN'S MONARCHS- RETIRED FROM BUSINESS. Vol. II. 

THOMAS A KEMPIS'S OF THE IMITATION OF CHRIST With a 
Preface by the Rev. George Tyrrell, S.J. 

THACKERAY'S HENRY ESMOND. 

DELITZSCH'S JEWISH ARTIZAN LIFE IN THE TIME OF CHRIST 

The translation made expressly for this edition. 

CHARLES DICKENS'S PICKWICK PAPERS. Vol. i 

CHARLES DICKENS'S PICKWICK PAPERS. Vol. 2 

THE ODES OF HORACE. In Latin and English. The English 
Version by F-hilip Francis. The Latin text based on that of 
Mdller's. Edited by Mr. W. H. D. Rouse, formerly Fellow of 
Christ s College, Cambridge, who has added an index of names. 

^"XfS.J'^^''^^'''^ HOLMES'S AUTOCRAT OF THE BREAKFAST 
TABLE. 

MISS MITFORD'S TALES OF OUR VILLAGE. (First Series) 

"'^w^^J- n^*''*?^^'^ CHEMICAL HISTORY OF A CANDLE. 

With illustrations. 

BUNYAN'S PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

CHARLES DICKENS'S TALE OF TWO CITIES and ) ,„ ^^^ 
WILKIE COLLINS'S A ROGUE'S LIFE. ) volume 

BURNEY'S HISTORY OF THE BUCCANEERS OF AMERICA. 



An ttnpracadanted tnmpl* ot 
labour, enUrpriM, and ehtapnaM 

Now being iuaed la 24 Fortalgktly Parts. Each put priM 74. ict 
To b« completed in 2 vols. 

THE LIVING RACES 

OF MANKIND 

A popular illaatrated account of the cuBtoms, habits, pursuits, 

feasts, and ceremonies of the races of mankind 

throughout the world. 

By EMINENT SPECIALISTS 

The Publishers are happy to say that they have secured the 
co-operation of many eminent experts and others, who are contributing 
to the text and illustrations. The former is written in a popular and 
interesting style, bui nothing is allowed to interfere with the accuracy 
of the information contained in the work, the whole of which is prmted 
on the best English art paper. 

Som9 ot th» eoatrlbatom 

H. B. Sir EVBRARD IM THURN. 
K.C.M.a. 



R. LYOEKKER, F.R.5 

Sir HARRY JOHNSTON, Q-CM-O., 

K.C.B., etc. 
PRINCE ROLAND BONAPARTE 
Dr. R. W. SHUFELDT 
P- >V«9or LONGFORD 
i; R. LORD CUHZON 
pToie wr KEANE 
Pr, J64Mr PETRUCCI 
The EARL OF RONALDSHAY 
PRINCE QAOARINE 



H. N. HUTCHINSON, B.A., 

p.R.a.s. 

A. H. SAVAOB-LANDOR 
VlM-Admiral Sir WM. ACLAND, 

Bart.. C.V.O. 
Admiral 51r CYPRIAN BRIDQE. 

a.CB. 
The Late Sir Hngh LOW, a.C.M.a. 
H. LINO ROTH 



aOO PHOTOORAPHS FROM LIFE 

as COLOURED PLATES, and also MAPS 

Volume I., comprising parts I. to XII. In demy quarto. 

Handsome cloth gilt and gilt edges I?*' JJ* 

Half green French Morocco gilt and gilt edges . . • • •'»•»■. 

Half rich red Persian Morocco gilt and gilt edges. . . . . 12s. M. 

FuU rich red Persian Morocco gilt and gUt edges . . • . 158. Od. 

BINDING CASES 

Handsome cloth gilt 

Half green French Morocco 
Half rich red Persian Morocco 

Full rich red Persian Morocco 

U 



net 



Is. 9d. 
2s. 9d. 
3s. Od. 
Cf. Oh. 



Messrs. HUTCHINSON & Co. have pleasure in 
announcing that they have secured for publica- 
tion Novels by the following well-known 
Authors : — 

LUCAS MALET 

H. RIDER HAGGARD 

KATHERINE CECIL THURSTON 

JEROME K. JEROME 

MARY CHOLMONDELEY 

ROBERT S. HICHENS 

ELLEN THORNEYCROFT FOWLER 

RICHARD WHITEING 

ALLEN RAINE 

DOROTHEA GERARD 

FRANKFORT MOORE 

GUY THORNE 

G. B. BURGIN 

MRS. BAILLIE-REYNOLDS 

L. DOUGALL 

CHARLES GARVICE 

E. EVERETT-GREEN 

WM. LE QUEUX 

VINCENT BROWN 

u 



\k 



i«' 



New 6s. Novels 



Bach m crown 8vo. cloth gilt 



The Far Horizon 



By LUCAS MALBT 

Author of '• The W«««» of Sin, * Sit Richard Ca1m»<Jy." etc. 

The book deals with the acts and opinions of a man of foreign 
birth, who, after many years of office work, Bnds himself suddenly 
poHsessed of leisure, and a moderate fortune. The Meoe is la.d 
wclusively in London and the western suburbs. Incidentally the 
reader will renejv acquaintance with certain persons already pe«-h»P» 
known to him through •' The History of Sir Richard Calmady. The 
Waaes of Sin." and "A Counsel of Perfection." The book covers a 
period of about three years, from 1899 to 1902, and touches on matters 
of modern Bnance, manners, and morals, on matters theatrical, and 
matters religious. 



Ring in the New 



By RICHARD WHITEINQ 

Author of "NO. 5 John Street." "The VeUowVan." etc. 

Although this book has been nearly two years in the writing, it 
mifiht Si hive been written immediately after the great polittcal and 
S upheaval wh.ch has recently taken place at the poUa. It .. 
S^ntiafly a book not only of our time but of °"'' »iX" J tf-S^^fi^J^J 
a oirl of education and gentle nurture who finds herself penniless at 
eilhteS S her way to make in the world. Her .struggle, and the 
SfS.^ other women who have to work to live, is o".f. <>? th« "•'" 
Semis of the book. The awful luxury, of the «««. . ^'^^J Xr Thi 
result, the equally awful and demoralizing poverty, is another. The 
Sis a passionate cry for new heavens and a new earth realizable 
K ^low^ ThSheroine is brought into contact with some of the finer 
•nirUs-men and women-flghting for the better time; and something 
if shown of a new^nd noller Wmia of the labour cause in is 

brighter aspects, its refined enioyrn^\*^« "ffi S? of the 
cravings for the higher things as the right of all. T*'f.,»*'^8 ^ ^l 
.tory is mainly in London, with its wonders of cosmic life, scenery and 
character, the mirror of the world. 

16 



The Gambler 



By KATHERINB CECIL THURSTON 

Author of "Thf Circto." " John Chilcot*. M.P.."«tc. 
With 8 /ullage Illustrations from drawings by John Cameron. 

.. f«ii!,'r^1?*°"M S*.?' ",°*.'' '* ?.". '^*" greater achievement than wai 
^iS5..?i*ft*-'- ^f • i»'»."".'tinganloriKinal. and the heroine, a 
beautiful Irlah girl, U as fascinating as she is uncommon. Ihe story 
Oeal* in a dramatic and cucitlng manner with an impoverished Irish 
famUy of the better class. The head of the house is a gambler, and 
Clodagh, bright, gay, impulsive, but the soul of honour, inherits hit 
^S°^i ^''* .«cene« shift from Ireland to the Continent, where 
Clodagh goea with a husband, whom she has married almost without 
tnougJ-t on her fathers death. Then love is awakened in her by 
another, and intrigues, debts, and difHcuIties beset her, but she is 
•avedwhen rum seems coming. Clodagh is so intensely hum.nn and 
ovable in her strength and weakness alilw thnt there is from L.it to 
last a compeUing interest in the story. 



Made in His Image 



By QUY THORN e 

Author of " When it was Dark." " A Lost Cause." etc. 

rk J!*.* P*l*"0"«nal success of Mr. Guy Thome's novel, " When it was 
Uark, which has attained to a sale far in excess of almost any novel of 
modem times, ensures a big welcome for this new story from his pen. 
The publishers would lay stress on the fact that it is an ; i-solutcly new 
book, only just completed. It is right up-to-date, ai d deals with a 
problem now exercising the minds of many. The author takes two 
young men fronn Oxford, who both interest themselves in social affairs. 
l-la2el believes in the Incarnation and sees everything in the light of it, 
but Bosanquet is the high-minded sceptic. Bosanquet becomes powerful 
and deals resolutely with the unemployable portion of humanity. The 
large and uncultivated Cornish hinterland, in his hands, becomes a slave 
colony— a sort of Siberia. Hazel opposes Bosanquefs movement to no 
purpose. There follows a hideous revolt among the slaves, and a minia- 
ture civil war, and Bosanquefs schem»4ail8. A love story runs through 
the book, Hazel losing the girl he loves to Bosanquet and sacriHcina 
himself for them, while the fulness of incident and strong dramatic 
scenes make the story a vivid and engrossing one. It cannot but make 
a wide appeal, for its purpose must be that, in solving the problem with 
Which he deals, the Church of England must be the instrument. The 
author^ book. " When it was Dark," has already been translated into 
many Buropean languages, and has been made the subject of hundreds 
Of semons and discourses by great divines and other religious leaders, 
and this new book is calculated to increase the strong hold which he has 
secured on an iiiimense number of readers. 

17 



New 6j. Novels 



The Way of the Spirit 

By H. RIDER HAQQARD 

Author of " King Solomon's Mines." " 8h«.''cto. 

This new book is one of the most powerful stories that has ever 
come from the pen of Mr. Rider Haggard. It is a novel of mingled 
character and romance : the story of a man who having by nature the 
best instincts, on the occasion of a tragic event vows that he will 
renounce his habits of life and endeavour to live a life of duty, froni 
which resolution he never swerves. 



The Spanish Dowry 



By L. DOUQALL 

Author of " Begsars All." "The Zelt-Oeiit," "The Barthhr Purgstory." etc. 

In her new novel Miss Uougall does not discuss any problem, but 
gives an original if somewhat fanciful storv in a quaint setting. It is 
pure romance with a mystery, and with a plot much too intricate to be 
even suggested here, but which will keep the reader's interest alive. 
Miss Dougall has on this occasion laid her scenes in England — in 
Devonshire— so that altogether the book may be considered a departure 
from her usual work, andit is certainly much more lightly handled. 



By the Author of " The MS. in the Red Box." 



Captain John Lister 



A TALE OP AXHOLMB 

By JOHN A. HAMILTON 

' This seventeenth century tale, by an author whose first stoiy created 
something of a sensation a year or two ago, will be found full of exciting 
adventures, and there is a strong love interest. The author has taken 
great pains with his local colour, and the characters are well drawn. 
It is a good historical romance, and a worthy successor to the " M.S. in 
the R^ Box,'-' which proved so successful that many thousands of copies 
^ of the book were sold. 



18 



New 68. Novels 

In Subjection 

By ELLEN THORNEYCROPT FOWLER 

Author of ''^^---Pja »"W C.r„.by." "A Doubl. Thr..d." 
Tho PuTinitdons," cto. 
Th« immense number of reader* of " Concernina Isabel Carnahv •• 

hSibrS"?„"?hI''* ■■*■"??«"""" °' *''-» charmin/i"^„e and h^r 
husband Jn the pages of this new rolume. althoush the book is i„ «^ 

The Artful Miss Dill 

By FRANKFORT MOORE 

Author of "Th, ■!5?««»/.2r-.^;.:W Forbid th. Bann.." 

Ths scene of the opening part of this new novel is laid at raro,.«- 
There are exciting adventure, of the hero and hero ne in the SdS 

2"th;''caHton"iot.T,rr '^^ ''"''T"'^ *^'»» DUI comei'to^S^urS 
at tne Carlton Hotel that she reveals her most femini«« «J^\,^ 

«qu«jtly most interesting traits. The author deasw"hTome"Jhase"s 
?iJJ,^'^'%*'^^'\"'°i^"*. '*^'**y ^'th his accustomed d^xTerify and 
Si^ °' *°"*=''; "r*^ '* '• "°' ""'••'e'y that "The Artful M?8gDiH-. 
will become one of the most popular of his many bookT 



The Pride of Life 



'etc. 



By DOROTHEA QERARD 

Authsr of "The Three E«t«nti«l8." " The Blood Tax. c«. 
HJ-w^ McDougall's vocation is to be minister to quarry folk in the 
cripples his Idealistic tendencies. His two daughters and s^n crow Co 
?£l2^vr''**^.r^'''' '>*•"• *"«* »"= »hrinks info his shell of ?eserve'^ 
SLS^^J!!! *^**.? "y* ^^i''* ""*" <=hance. and urges his sister 7he 
b^ £„.n*^''i^"!^y* ^ •? ^"* "'*'=»'• "« •• «ven guilty of a cr n^ 
but Fenella will not submit. Her sister, however, has no such scruples 
STlr^'^f '°'-Fin. "The Pride of Life " is. of cour^ thfcaE 

^d.nil"''^'^"'*'*.*'^^l*^'» P°P"'«'" «"thor a theme for a natural 
and convincing novel, with the character drawing firm and assurol. 

19 



MICROCOTY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 



1.0 



I.I 



I5J 



IK 
u 



12.8 

■ 4.0 



2.2 
2.0 

1.8 



1.25 




J /IPPLIED IM/IGE Inc 



1653 East Moin Street 
Rochester, New York U609 
(716) *e2 - 0300 - Phone 
(716) 288 - 5989 -Fat 



USA 



New 6s. Novels 



The Only World. 



By Q. B. BURQIN 

Author of "The Shutters of Silence," "The Marble City," eti 

This novel is based upon the lines : 

" The only world in which to live and move 
And have our being, is the world of love," 
Eliot Tanquery, an impecunious younger sen, of good family, 
tireo of the idle life of a society hanger-on, without any objei 
He loves wealthy Lady Mary Knut, but will not say so on a( 
his poverty. He makes her understand his reason for not speaki 
he goes away to America to work, and he shows her how she hi 
him. He determines to carve his own way, and to live by 
labour. Thereafter the story is developed on interesting lii 
incidentally, the author makes his hero meet with sundry adve 
the Canadian wilds. 



I 



The House of Riddles 

' By DOROTHEA QERARD 

Author of "The Three Essentials," "The Blood Tax," etc. 

"The House of Riddles," which occupies nearly the who 
volume, is a story with a very ingeniously constructed plot, 
author's process of working it out will completely hold the atl 
the reader to the last page. The early scenes of the no\el ai 
the Klondyke, but the action of the later chapters takes pi 
Scottish golfing town. The remaining stories in this book a 
volume of excellent reading, containing some of Dorothea Gers 
work. 



A Man of No Family 

£y C. C. and E. M. AlOTT 

This breezy, smartly-written, and wholesome novel is by 
kaows all about hunting, shooting, and outdoor games, and \ 
a special appeal to readers of both sexes who love the open i 
hero is a fine young fellow and rich, but he is a brewer, and 
regarded by the elite of the neighbourhood in which he hu 
loves the daughter of Lord Melborough, and the mother obj< 
he is a strong man, and there is a runaway marriage. Tt 
intervenes, and all comes right in the end. The charac 
convincingly natural, and the atmosphere of the story is alv 
fresh air of Ihe country, 

SO 



City," etc. 



1 family, becomes 
iny object in life, 
so on account of 
}t speaking before 
iw she has helped 
live by his own 
;sting lines, and, 
Iry adventures in 



IX," etc. 

the whole of this 
:ed plot, and the 
d the attention of 
no\el are laid in 
takes place in a 
} book make up a 
lea Gerard's best 



New 68. Novels 

\ Queen of the Rushes 

By ALLEN RAINE 

Author of "A Welsh Singer,"' "Torn Sails," etc. 

Allen Raine's last book, " Hearts of Wales," was an excursion 
into the mediaeval history of Wales, but her new novel is a quite 
modern story, for it is really based on the great wave of revivalism in 
Wries, and how deeply interesting such a subject can be in the hands 
of this elever author is easily conjectured. Allen Raine's popu- 
lanty is increasing by leaps and bounds, and she ran, with truth, be 
said to now have millions of readers, for nearly a million copies of 
her books have been sold. Her pure and wholesome stories are taking 
a great hold of English-speaking people throughout the world 



Thalassa 



By Mrs. BAILLIE-REYNOLDS 

Author of "Phoebe in Fetters," "The Man Who Won, 



etc. 



Mrs. Baillie-Reynolds is one of the cleverest of the new writers. 
Her latest story, " The Man who Won," has already reached its fourth 
edition, and has been generally recognized by the p!-ess as a most brilliant 
book. In this new novel, which will be found very attractive, a girl is 
taken from a cultured Bohemian atmosphere abroad and placed with 
her guardian, Orme, the owner of some Mills and a North Riding 
man. It is a rough household, but Aldyth charms it into order. Ormc 
falls in love with her, but she is driven from the house by his stinging 
words. Then follow many ups and downs and strange happenings for 
her, but she marries Orme in the end. The author has made a special 
study of Aldyth and Orme, the central figures— they are very human, and 
their lives are made deeply interesting, as is only to be expected from 
so clever a writer. 



A CHEAP EDITION OP A POPULAR NOVEL 



el is by one who 
s, and will make 
e open air. The 
ver, and is shyly 
ti he hunts. He 
ther objects, but 
age. The father 
characters are 
y is always the 



Love Decides 



By CHARLES QARVICE 

Author of " Just a Girl," " Love the Tyrant," etc. 
In crown 8vo, handsome cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. 

" Mr. Garvice is a born story-teller, with a gift of imagination and 
the born story-teller's art of conducting a story."— i?c/crcc, 

" Mr. Charles Garvice comes near to filling the place left vacant by 
I Mrs. Henry Wood."— Boofcwan 

21 



A Oirl of Spirit 



By CHARLES OARVICB 

Author of " Love the Tyrant," " Linked by F«te." " Love Decide*." etc, 

Constance Desbrook on the death of her father finds herself with 
but a smaU income and practically dependent upon her cousin Ralph, 
who has been made her guardian and her father's heir ; a later will, 
however, which has been suppressed by the family solicitor, who is 
ill love with Constance, bequeathes all the property to her. By 
degrees the cousins fall in love, but meanwhile the solicitor makes 
mischief, having discovered an early love r.ffair between Ralph and a 
certain Countess, whom the solicitor now threatens, with the result 
that the circumstances are revealed to Constance, who leaves her 
guardian. By a series of incidents, including a murder by the solicitor 
m a struggle for the will, Constance is ultimately placed in her right 
position and the cousins are united. There is a subsidiary plot, and 
the story is not without its humorous side. Some of the scenes are 
in quite a light comedy vein, and the author has given exceptional care 
to the characterization, while providing, as is usual with him, a good 
and interesting plot with plenty of incident. 

" It is a satisfaction to me that your pure and bright fiction should 
be weU known amongst my fellow countrymen."— W. Robertson, LL.D. 

«• We are frankly grateful to Mr. Garvice for his books, for the 
•Island of the Blessed' are far distant nowadays, and the pilots who 
know the course and can guide us thither are few."— Dat/y News. 



The Magic Island 



THE STORY OF A GARDEN 
AND ITS MASTER. 

By EVELYN EVERETT-QREEN 

Author of "The Secret of Wold Hall," " Dufferin'8 Keep." etc. 

The story is quite different from anything previously written by thii 
popular author. It is a romance woven around a river 'sland, which i 
really an exquisite garden. Airellc, the heroine, lands there am 
e^ounters "the Matter," a recluse with g^cat stores of knowledge 
The girl comes and goes and learns of him. He brings AirfUe and hi 
nephew together, but she worships the Master, whose W* sto^ ' 
unfolded to her, and she becomes the means of bringmg a husband aru 
wife together. It is essentially a book for the spring and the summer 
for the garden and its glories play an important part in the taie. 



'iP 



it- 



New 68. Novels 



Mrs. Grundy's Crucifix 



By VINCENT BROWN 

Author of "A Magdalen's Husband." 4c. 

for rec'o^JZT HXlrZ'f'^AM^:^''^ t° t"*"°* "avctowait 
literary success anTi k!= k ' ''^ **»8<la'«n 8 Husband," was a creat 

Grundy's CrL^iSx " heTaS J"^.«^ ^^^u'^u^*^^ ^'""' ^u* i" " Mrs. 
his previous efforts. xLe ^rrn^inal c^lr^il"'' ^'^ ''^ '^.""^ *° «"' «" 
past is wrapped in silence '^ S SherS^'' " ^u^' Wyborne. whose 
to her, but certain facts are moL if ''* 8 nephew engages himself 

Shernfold's own son bSieves Ther wol^^h ^"h ''* ^'^hdrawl. while the 
The "iVlrs. Grundy "oTthJ^ ^ZW^'^^^^^"'^ ^^^.^^^^^ 
curiosity and of soite and Vht o *7 . ^- °''P'"' " woman full of 

well as of Lady SherlifoW who .h"" IT^'*" a careful study of her as 
mother and a v^e^human'beTng: ""^'^ ^ ^^ ^°™"' is a devoted 



The Wood End 



By J. E. BUCKR05E 

writ^%^tts"SieiLl"rLP'r"''? '" introducing this story by a new 
literary grUe, and?s alto^ethrT^"^'? T''^" = '*, ''^^ atm^pYere and 
it holds the r^der with S deen hf.:^''*''=Pr" °' T'"'*- «^yond this 
and ends in a secret marLot^f *T '".*f*»*.- ^ '°v«= id^ll begins 
makes the heroine a widow* almo^J/. '"''**^" ''\^'''.°' the husband 
circumstance i of this dea7h iK 1^*^" t^ ^''f '^ * bride. The 
presenting one of the strong... ^^ ''"*i'°'' ^^e opportunity of 

birth of a child hrin«! !,t'^°"f.*'st scenes ever found in a novel. The 
thewSowmaiiesa^secon^^^^^^ trouble, and in desperation 

stubbor .ht for her child Rn«l t'^ ." f- ^"PP *="*"« *» ^er 
charac; A ...^^i *i. .*="'"'• Rose, the leading figure, is finelv 

anSerestfngr;JoSray"er "'"'■^'='*'"^ ""^^ indi^idu^alitiis 'clever^: 



A NEW VOLUME OP 

HUTCHINSON'S SELECT NOVELS 

In the Name of a Woman 

By A. W. MARCHMONT 

Author of " By Right of Sword." " A Dash for a Throne," *c. 

In crown 8vo, cloth, handsotnely gilt, 3s. 6d. 

93 



A LITERARY EVENT 

In the eariy Autumn off 1906 Meur*. HUTCH1N50N ft 

will publish 



A RBMARKABLB NBW NOVEL 

BNTITLBO 



PRISONERS 



By MARY CHOLMONDBLBY 

Author of 
"RBD POTTAOB" 



Wtth illustrations by Brnbst Prater 

In cloth gilt, 6s. 

Having regard to the immense popularity of " Red Pottage ' 
not turpriaing that the author of it has taken years in the writi 
the present novel, which follows it. The publication of this boot 
undoubtedly be awaited with great interest by the author' 1 
following, and the Publishers are convinced that it will make a 
impression on all who read it. It is a love story cleverly constn 
it has a good plot, some intensely dramatic situations, many inten 
character studies, and above all a heroine who is very humac 
whose character ::he author has studied and delineated witl 
greatest possible success. The scenes are laid first in Italy and 
wards in England, and the story is concerned with the consequen 
an early love afhir being revived by the heroine after her marriag 
of her relations with two half-brothers, of whom one is sacrificed, 
reader it held to the story from beginning to end and it give 
author the opportunity for the display of that strength in hu* w 
which has made her name famous. 



A.C.Fomt*r,PrM*r TiOtrStrn 



50N a. CO. 



Pottage " it is 
the writl-j; of 
:his book will 
author's big 
make a deep 
constructed, 
ny interesting 
' human and 
ed with the 
ily and after- 
nsequences of 
marriage and 
icrificed. The 
I it gives the 
n her writing 



tnUr 5trt*t, B.C. 



