Trials of the Human Heart, Volume 2 (1795)
Author: Rowson, Susanna.
Publication info: Trials Of the Human Heart . . . 004-156. Philadelphia: printed for the author, by Wrigley & Berriman', 1795.

Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
Title Page
TRIALS
OF THE
HUMAN HEART,
A NOVEL.
IN FOUR VOLUMES.
By Mrs. ROWSON,
OF THE NEW THEATRE, PHILADELPHIA ,
AUTHOR OF CHARLOTTE, FILLE DE CHAMBRE,
INQUISITOR, & c. & c.
—If there's a power above us,
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) he muſt delight in virtue.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
The ſoul ſecured in her exiſtence, ſmiles,
At the drawn dagger and defies its point.
VOL. II.
PHILADELPHIA:
M. DCC. XCV.
Preliminaries
[Page ]
Main text
[Page ]
LETTER XXV.
MR RAINSFORTH SEN. to MISS HOWARD.
May 17 th , 1778.
MADAM,
Looking over ſome papers which were
lately in poſſeſſion of my ſon, I found
ſome letters which I think proper to return
to you; and am very ſorry if any thing
has paſſed between you that may occaſion
you future uneaſineſs. I am obliged to
you for the very generous ſentiments
[Page 004]
expressed in thoſe letters, towards my whole
family, and beg leave to inform you, that
your kind wiſhes, reſpecting my ſon's happiness,
are amply fulfilled, as he was yesterday
married to a very amiable woman, possessing
a fortune of twenty thouſand pounds.
I am, madam,
your humble ſervant,
F. RAINSFORTH.
MERIEL to CELIA, (in continuation.) WITH this letter, my dear Celia, came a
parcel containing all the letters I had ever
wrote to Rainsforth; and believe me, the
unfeeling tenor of his father's letter did not
hurt me half ſo much, as the idea of his
cruelty, in ſuffering his father firſt to peruſe,
and then return them; my pride was alarmed,
my ſenſibility ſhocked! a man in whom I
placed ſuch implicit confidence; one whom
I thought endowed with every virtue. Celia,
I feel a painful void in my heart; I feel that
I ſhall never again place a confidence in any
man. My couſin Heſter has frequently told
me, that Rainsforth was decietful, that he
[Page 005]
ſaw my partiality and played upon it, merely
for his own diverſion; but I always doubted;
nay, to ſuch a height was my enthusiasm
raiſed, I could not have believed it
poſſible for one who wore ſo fair a ſemblance
of virtue, to be ſo very falſe, ſo unaccountably
wanton in his cruelty towards an inoffensive
girl, whoſe whole ſoul was abſorbed
in one affectionate wiſh for his felicity: why,
when I had taught my heart to reſign him
without a murmur; why, when the firſt
hard trial was paſt, and every hope was extinguished,
did he ſeek to awaken a paſſion,
which, tho' reaſon had in ſome meaſure repelled
its violence, was ſtill tender, ſtill ardent
in my boſom. Oh! my friend, had he
without renewing the correſpondence which
we had mutually agreed to drop, given his
hand to Miſs Kingly, I ſhould not have complained;
no, my Celia, ſo pure was my
love, that I ſhould have exulted in his felicity,
and whilſt I thought him worthy of every
bleſſing, have rejoiced to ſee them placed
within his reach. But alas! he is not worthy,
and perhaps this poor gentle affectionate
girl, for ſuch I am told ſhe is, may ſoon
experience a change in his ſentiments, when
ſhe has neither the power to leave him, nor
liberty to complain of his conduct.
[Page 006]
May 20 th .
I begin to be more compoſed; I am resolved
to deſpiſe the whole ſex; they may
wear a ſemblance of virtue, but the reality
of it is foreign to their hearts. Every occurrence
of life will be now equally indifferent
to me; I have vowed to devote myſelf
to my mother while ſhe lives, and whenever
heaven pleaſes to call her away, my incessant
prayer ſhall be ſoon to follow; I do
not wiſh to go before her, becauſe, I ſee her
only hope of ſupport muſt proceed from me;
and unboundedly grateful will be my heart,
if by any means whatever I can preſerve her
from miſery.
May 29 th .
It was certainly a wiſe diſpenſation of Providence,
that prevented my union with
Rainsforth; had I been ſeparated from my
dear mother, where now would ſhe have
found a comforter. My father is in priſon
Celia; my whole fortune is expended; but
thank heaven, I have ſtill health and ſtrength
to work. I live in a miſerable apartment
in the Fleet priſon, I ſit loſt as it were to
every thing but miſery; but yet, my dear
Celia, I can look up to heaven with gratitude;
I am not a wife, I am not a mother,
I feel not the ſtrong chords of maternal
[Page 007]
affection twining round my heart, and wringing
it with unutterable anguiſh; I might
have been more wretched than I am: and
whilſt I can ſay that, let me expreſs only
gratitude towards the great Ruler of the universe,
who has not tried me beyond my
ſtrength to ſupport. Can you think, my
friend, that in this miſerable ſituation I have
yet one ray of comfort breaks on my benighted
ſoul; yes, Celia, I have: my dear mother
is at length convinced, that my love, my dutiful
attentions, are the reſult of the feelings of
my heart. On me alone ſhe now reſts; to me
alone looks for comfort; her eyes once
more beam on me with affection; her heart
again is lift up to heaven for my felicity;
and who my dear friend, who that knows
the juſt value of maternal love, would not
gladly reſign wealth, nay almoſt every consideration,
to enjoy ſo ineſtimable a bleſſing.
I cannot at this time give you particulars;
indeed, I know not why I ſhould write
to you at all, for ſure my letters convey no
pleaſure to your friendly boſom, but I cannot
give up the greateſt pleaſure of my life, unleſs
you expreſsly deſire it. To you I can unfold
my thoughts; to you, tell the ſorrows of my
heart; and as I write, fond fancy repreſents
you as feeling for my afflictions: I ſee the tear
of ſympathy tremble in your eye; I hear the
[Page 008]
ſoft cheering voice of conſolation break
from your lips: I am ſoothed; I am comforted
by the thought: ſurely, my Celia,
will not refuſe, this almoſt only conſolation
to her afflicted
MERIEL.
LETTER XXVI.
MERIEL to CELIA.
June 10 th , 1778.
I have now ſat down, to give you the
particulars of a ſcene, which, when I laſt
wrote, I could not command ſufficient composure
to deleniate. I had been out one afternoon
on particular buſineſs; indeed to
look after ſome employment, whereby I
might conduce to the ſupport of the family.
On my return I found my mother weeping
[Page 009]
over a bit of paper, which ſhe held in her
hand. I enquired the cauſe. She gave me
the paper, and I read on it, “Barwell, Sheriff's
officer, Carey-ſtreet.” “Your father
is arreſted, Meriel,” ſaid ſhe. “Gracious
heaven!” ſaid I, “then we are all ruined:
but what is the ſum; at whoſe ſuit is he
arreſted.” “At the ſuit of that villain
Dell,” ſhe replied, “for fifty pounds, which
he has lent him; no doubt at the gaming
table; he alſo threatens him with a prosecution
for a criminal correſpondence with
his wife. Oh heavens!” continued ſhe, redoubling
her tears, “when ſhall I die and
be at peace.” It was in vain to offer consolation.
I did not even attempt it, but resolved,
if poſſible, to ſee if any thing could
be done, either to ward off the impending
blow, or to extricate us from the difficulties
attending it. I went immediately to an attorney,
made him acquainted with the caſe,
and requeſted his advice. He told me there
was no redreſs, that the money muſt be paid,
and in caſe of the proſecution, it was moſt
likely he would be caſt with damages. This
intelligence was an additional weight upon
my ſpirits. However, I proceeded to Careystreet,
where I found this thoughtleſs father
ſurrounded by unfortunate men of the lowest
claſs, with a bowl of punch before him,
and in the very act of ſinging a drinking
[Page 010]
ſong. When he ſaw me, he looked abaſhed.
I aſked if I coud ſpeak to him in another
room, for my ſoul ſhrunk from the ſociety
of thoſe unhappy beings, with whom he
ſeemed ſo pleaſed. When we were accommodated
with another apartment, I aſked
him, how this debt was contracted, and by
what means he meant to diſcharge it. I cannot
repeat to you the anſwer he made; it
was ſo replete with contradiction, that I
had ſcarcely patience to hear him out. When
he had finiſhed, I enquired, if that debt was
paid, were there no others of the ſame ſort.
“Conſider ſir,” ſaid I, “it will not be long
I ſhall have it in my power to anſwer theſe
demands, and when my money is entirely
expended, where is my dear mother to find
ſupport.” “Ah Meriel,” ſaid he, “you
are always more anxious about her than
me, you don't care what becomes of your
father.” “I ſhould think, ſir,” ſaid I with
ſome warmth, “that I had given ſufficient
proof of my attention to the happineſs of both.
I am ſorry to uſe any language to a father,
which may be deemed improper; but I
muſt ſay, had you paid as much attention to
your own happineſs as was undoubtedly
your duty, many of the afflictions, if not all
which have fallen upon our family, might
have been avoided. I will pay this money ſir,
and I hope you will not think I take too
[Page 011]
great a liberty if I adviſe you, hereafter to
ſhun ſuch unworthy acquaintance as Dell,
and ſtrive rather to obtain ſome genteel employment,
by which theſe kind of ſcenes
may in future be avoided.
“You talk like a very unfeeling girl,
Meriel,” ſaid he. “Do you imagine then it
is ſo eaſy for a man, born and brought up a
gentleman, to ſubmit to the drudgery of servitude:
no Miſs; if your ideas are ſo mean,
mine are not, I will ſtarve firſt, and would
rather ſee you ſtarve than have my family
diſgraced by your following any ſervile,
mean employment.” Believe me, Celia,
when he uttered theſe ſentiments, I felt ſo
irritated by his fooliſh pride, that had not the
idea of my ſuffering mother at that moment
obtruded on my mind, I ſhould have left him
to his fate. However, I ſtifled my riſing anger,
and having given him a draught on my
banker to diſcharge the arreſt, returned to
conſole my mother. When I entered, I was
ſurpriſed to ſee her grief more violent than
ever. She was wringing her hands and weeping
with great bitterneſs. After many fruitless
enquiries concerning this freſh torrent
of ſorrow, I learnt that Mr. Leſage, the banker,
with whom I had placed the trifling remnant
of my fortune, was declared a bankrupt.
To deſcribe my feelings is impoſſible.
[Page 012]
However I ſaw my mother wanted comfort, and I
exerted my utmoſt power to ſtifle emotions,
which if indulged, would only ſerve to increase
her anguiſh.
“We muſt go to priſon,” ſaid ſhe, “we
muſt all go to priſon, and who is to ſupport
us there?” “Providence, my dear mother,”
ſaid I, “We will place our hopes on that benign
power, who never forſakes thoſe, who,
in full confidence of ſupport, exert their
utmoſt abilities and rely on him only for
ſucceſs. Come, come, chear up, thank God,
I am healthy and able to work.” She gazed
on me for a moment; then throwing
her arms round me, ſhe cried, “oh! my
child, I will doubt your virtue no longer;
your heart muſt be pure, or you could not
thus rely on heaven for ſupport; but oh!
my dear Meriel, it will wound my heart severely
to ſee you obliged to labour for subsistence.”
“Do not think of it,” ſaid I;
“let me ſee you but tolerably happy and I
ſhall not regret any hardſhip, however severe:
I will never leave you, my beloved
mother; only let me be once more called
the child of your affection, and I ſhall think
myſelf completely rewarded for every suffering
it may pleaſe heaven to inflict.” A few
days after this, my father was removed to
this miſerable place: we ſold the beſt part
[Page 013]
of our furniture and cloaths to diſcharge the
debts owing among our trades people. My
mother then came to my father: I do not
ſleep in the priſon, but come here every
morning; I perform all their domeſtic offices,
go out for their proviſion, &c. but as
yet, have not been able to procure any
work. Indeed, I had hope of being employed
by an embroiderer, but on being
aſked to give ſecurity, for the ſafety of whatever
work I might be entruſted with; I unfortunately
happened to mention, being related
to Mr. Moſſop's family; of courſe, the
maſter of the ſhop applied to my aunt for
my character. Celia, this aunt denied any
knowledge of me, ſaid ſhe had no relation
who was in circumſtances to want employment
of that kind, that ſhe had ſome knowledge
of a young woman of the name of
Howard, ſhe believed, I might be very honest
but I was certainly no relation of her's.
Thus my dear girl, was my laudable design
fruſtrated; for the man naturally
enough obſerved if I could be guilty of telling
a lie; I might be capable of worſe actions.
I hope, however, in a ſhort time to
procure ſomething to do; for our little
ſtock of money diminiſhes very faſt.
[Page 014]
Auguſt 15 th , 1778.
Of all the ſcenes through which we are
doomed to paſs, ſure none is ſo truly painful,
as that of being witneſs to the death of
thoſe whom nature has placed in a near relation
to us; whom, ſpite of all their errors,
we cannot wholly diveſt our hearts of tenderness
for; and to ſee them approach the
awful confines of eternity in a frame of mind,
that renders all offered comfort ineffectual,
to calm their doubts and fears, when the
retroſpect of their paſt lives fills them only
with horror; and the idea of futurity brings
nothing but deſpair. Such a ſcene I have
lately paſt; my father is no more: he is I
hope at peace; to think otherwiſe would be
an agony too great to bear: poor man, to
the very laſt he was addicted to the fatal
errors that had undone him. Few were the
hours he ſpent in the apartment with my
mother, being chiefly at a place, which they
call the tap, where he could drown his care,
as he vainly imagined, and where he was
frequently drawn in to play cards, tho' sometimes
for the laſt ſix-pence he had in his
pocket.
One evening, at this place he quarrelled
with his antagoniſt, and high words enſued;
from words they went to blows, and my
[Page 015]
father recieved a ſtroke on his temple, which
leveled him with the ground. He fell with the
back of his head againſt an iron fender which
cut him ſeverely and fractured the ſkull;
all aſſiſtance was vain; he languiſhed four
days, in all the complicated agonies of pain
of body and diſtreſs of mind; tho' I flatter
myſelf he had ſome internal comfort in his
laſt moments, as he ſeemed more compoſed
for about two hours before his death. He
earneſtly requeſted forgiveneſs of both my
mother and myſelf, for the manifold injuries
he had done us; but to my great comfort,
mentioned no particulars: he alſo made a
declaration before witneſſes that the man
who ſtruck the unfortunate blow, was entirely
guiltleſs of intentional malice, as he
had been the firſt aggreſſor himſelf; and
the fall was entirely accidental. He expressed
a wiſh to ſee his ſiſter; in compliance
with his earneſt deſire I went to her, told
her of the melancholy accident, and earnestly
requeſted ſhe would viſit my dying father.
“Upon my word Meriel,” ſaid ſhe, “I
am extremely ſorry for this ſhocking affair;
but you know child my ſeeing him will be
of no uſe; it will only be hurting my own
feelings, with out being of the leaſt ſervice to
your father. I never can bear ſcenes of this
kind; my ſenſibility is ſo exquiſite, that,
was I to ſee my poor brother in this
[Page 016]
situation, I ſhould not recover it for a month.
Ah! poor man, he was always getting into
ſome miſchief or other; he never proſpered
in any thing after his marriage with your
mother.”
“You cannot ſuppoſe, madam, that the
want of proſperity was to be attributed to
that union.”
“Why, I don't know, Meriel, my brother
never loved your mother, but was artfully
drawn in.” “By whom, madam?”
“By your grand mother, Miſs, who wiſhed
to get a good ſettlement for her daughter.
Your mother too, pretended ſuch a
violent affection for him, that he could not
refuſe ſome little return of kindneſs, and
they never ceaſed their arts till they had
nooſed him faſt.”
“You talk in riddles, madam, my mother
brought my father a genteel fortune.”
“It was nothing, Miſs, to the fortune
he might have expected, if he had not offended
his father; I always ſaid no good
would come of the match.” “It is much
to be wiſhed, indeed, madam,” ſaid I,
“that ſuch a union never had taken place;
it would have ſpared my dear mother many
[Page 017]
years of ſevere anguiſh, and my unfortunate
ſelf would never have ſeen the light.” As
I ſaid this my heart was ſo oppreſſed I could
not refrain my tears. “Bleſs me! my dear,”
ſaid Mrs. Moſſop, in an affected accent of
kindneſs; “I did not mean to vex you,
you are not to be blamed for your parents
faults.”
“If they have faults, madam,” ſaid I,
“be aſſured I wiſh not to hear of them; it
would be a painful topic at any time, but
pardon me, if I ſay, at this particular ſeaſon,
it is a cruel one. I come to intreat you to
viſit a brother, who is poor and dying in
priſon. I ſhould think, had he millions of
faults, at this moment they would be all forgotten;
that you would remember only his
afflictions, and that he was your brother.”
I ſpoke this with ſome warmth; my aunt
heſitated for an anſwer; at length ſhe told
me ſhe would come the next morning. “It
will be too late, madam,” ſaid I, “it is
thought he cannot live the night out.”
“Dear, dear,” ſhe replied, “it is ſo unfortunate
that I have a large party coming
this afternoon, but if they leave me in any
tolerable ſeaſon”—I would hear no more,
but turning from her with a mixture of contempt
and pity, I returned to the habitation
of mourning and death. When I entered
[Page 018]
the room, my father enquired eagerly if ſhe
would come; I thought it would be wrong
to diſturb his laſt moments, with an account
of her unfeeling conduct, I therefore only
told him, ſhe was not able to come that
evening, but would be there early in the
morning. “It will be too late then,” ſaid he,
“I muſt write to her.” It was in vain we
remonſtrated; he would be raiſed in the
bed, with a deſign to write; but his head
would not permit him to trace even a ſingle
letter: he was ſeized with faintings and
when he recovered ſeemed to have forgot
his deſign. He ſpoke but little afterwards,
was wholly taken up in prayer: tho' he
frequently cried out in agony, “'tis all in
vain, I cannot be forgiven.” A worthy
well diſpoſed clergyman prayed beſided him,
and ſaid a great deal to compoſe him, and
calm his doubts. It had in ſome meaſure
the deſired effect: and about four o'clock
in the morning, he reſigned his ſoul into
the hand of Him who gave it.
My mother's ſorrow is not to be described.
All thought of our dreadful, deſolate
ſituation was entirely abſorbed in this heavy
affliction. I did not attempt to interrupt
her grief, as I thought, if ſuffered to take
its natural courſe, time would meliorate a
ſorrow, which, any attempt at preſent to
[Page 019]
ſoften, would but increaſe. In the courſe
of the next day, we expected my aunt to
make the promiſed viſit; but as the day passed
without ſeeing her, in the evening my
mother deſired me to go to her again, and
inform him of our loſs. I went, but was
ſuffered to wait near an hour, before ſhe appeared;
nor did my couſins come near me,
tho' I heard them laughing and talking in
the next room. Ah! ſaid I, mentally, the
afflicted are never admitted chearfully; they
are left to indulge their own ſad thoughts
in ſolitude. Cruel Heſter and Suſan, had you
been in affliction, would not I have abridged
my own pleaſures to comfort and conſole you.
When my aunt entered the room ſhe began;
“realy Meriel I have not been able to viſit
my brother before; but now I have half an
hour to ſpare, I will ſend for a coach, and
we will go together.” “Your viſit will no
doubt be acceptable to my mother, dear
madam,” ſaid I, “but my father is no longer
in a ſituation.”—
“He is dead then,” cried ſhe eagerly.
I bowed my head in ſilence.
“Well,” continued ſhe, “I rather expected
it, and I am much obliged to you for
calling, to let me know, as I ſhould have
[Page 020]
been greatly ſhocked to have found him
dead, when I had called, as I certainly ſhould,
either this evening or to-morrow morning.”
“My mother bid me aſk your advice concerning
the funeral madam, and not only
your advice, but your aſſiſtance.”
“Aſſiſtance, for what child?”
“Could you advance us a little money?”
“Money, Miſs Howard! You aſtoniſh
me; it is impoſſible you can be in want of
money, when you came to poſſeſſion of ſo
handſome a fortune within theſe two years.”
“I am very ſorry madam, that you can
ſuppoſe me capable of ſuffering my parents
to languiſh in priſon for fifty pounds, if I
could have commanded ſuch a ſum.”
“Why as to that Meriel, I thought you
were acting like a prudent girl, and meant
to take care of yourſelf; for I know you
paid a great deal of money for your father,
and might have continued ſo doing till you
had ruined yourſelf.”
[Page 021]
“I ſhould certainly have paid this laſt
debt, madam, had not the failure of Mr.
Leſage put it entirely out of my power.”
“Oh I remember hearing, that you loſt
ſix hundred pounds by his failure, but you
ſurely had a larger ſum by you than that.”
“Indeed aunt, that ſix hundred pounds
was all the dependence I had in the world.”
“Upon my word Meriel, I never was
more aſtoniſhed in my life. How have you
contrived to run thro' all that money. Your
mother and yourſelf muſt have been very extravagant,
and when that is the caſe, nothing
will ſave people from ruin. I am very ſorry
child, very ſorry; but it is not in my power
to help you; I have a large family, and
the education of my daughters is expenſive.
As to my poor brother, why, my advice is,
that you have him buried as privately, and
with as little expenſe as poſſible. You will
remember me to your mother; tell her I
am really concerned at her trouble; but it
is entirely out my power to help her, nor
indeed, do I think it would be of any uſe;
for was ſhe releived from theſe difficulties,
ſhe would ſoon be involved by her imprudence,
in others of the ſame ſort.”
[Page 022]
When I repeated this converſation to my
mother, ſhe ſaid, “it is no more than I expected,
my dear child; but I let you go to
make trial of her heart, that you might be
convinced, how little dependence is to be
placed on profeſſions of friendſhip, made to
us in our proſperity; and how little assistance
is to be hoped from relations. We
will ſell every valuable of our cloaths and
plate, to lay your father decently in the
ground, and to pay the debt for which I
now am become liable. It will, I am certain,
leave us almoſt deſtitute; but when
we have our liberty, we can perhaps gain
employment of ſome kind or other, I will
not mind how abject; for I would rather
hardly earn, or indeed beg my bread from
ſtrangers, than be ſubject to the unkindness
of haughty, unfeeling relations.”
This reſolution was immediately executed,
and when all expences were discharged,
we found ourſelves poſſeſſed of five
guineas, ſome trifling houſehold furniture,
and the meaneſt of our cloaths. With theſe
we left that abode of miſery, the Fleet prison,
and have taken a cheap lodging, on
the Surry ſide of Blackfriars bridge. I have
endeavoured to get ſome work, but as yet
without effect; and what adds to my uneasiness,
is, that my dear mother's health
[Page 023]
daily declines. As I have no other amusement,
I ſpend a good deal of time at my
pen. I have wrote ſeveral little poems,
which I intend to correct and offer to ſome
bookſeller. Perhaps by that means, I may
obtain ſomething towards our ſubſiſtance.
I feel a tranſient ray of hope dawn upon my
mind. My mother ſmiling, tells me, I am
too ſanguine; but my dear Celia, I always
was inclined to take the brighteſt ſide of
the proſpect, to hope for the beſt, and when
diſappointment arrives, to ſubmit with as
much patience as I can. I am what is generally
termed a caſtle builder; it is a weakness
(if it deſerves the appellation) from
which I derive amuſement at leaſt, and tho'
I know at the very moment I am indulging
thoſe ſanguine ideas, that my hopes have
no more foundation, than the bubble blown
from the pipe of a playful boy; yet I cannot
help being pleaſed with the airy fabric
of my own creating, and as ſoon as one vanishes,
(to continue the alluſion) I puff out
another, and ſo prevent myſelf from becoming
a prey to deſpair. And, believe
me Celia, I conſider this diſpoſition, as one
of the choiceſt gifts of heaven. Adieu my
friend; may you be happier than your
MERIEL.
[Page 024]
LETTER XXVII.
MERIEL to CELIA.
December 5 th , 1778.
It is now ſome months ſince I have taken
up my pen to addreſs my dear Celia.
Several times lately I have eſſayed to do it,
but unable to bear a retroſpect of my late
heavy affliction, have from time to time, deferred
the painful recital, till I begin to fear
my dear friend will think I am either numbered
with the dead, or become forgetful of
her friendſhip. I have a long tale to tell my
dear girl, a tale, which I fear, will ſteal many
a tear from your eyes as you peruſe it. In my
laſt I informed you of my mother's ill health,
and how unable we were to procure any proper
advice or aſſiſtance. From that time her
malady daily increaſed. I finiſhed my little
collection of poems and preſented them to a
bookſeller; but he told me, I had miſtaken
my talents, and that the whole collection was
[Page 025]
not worth a guinea. Diſheartened and dispirited
I returned to my mother, and now gave
up my whole time to watching and attending
her. Her diſorder increaſed with ſuch
rapidity, that in the courſe of a few weeks
ſhe was conſined to her bed. What a prospect
had I now before me, a beloved parent
ſinking by ſlow degrees into the grave; when
I had no method of procuring the comforts,
and even the neceſſaries of life were denied.
I had parted with all our apparel, except a
change of linen, and had now paſt one whole
day without food. My mother made no
complaints; but her pale wan countenance,
was to me a thouſand times more affecting
than unavailing exclamations. Our credit
had been long loſt in the neighbourhood,
and I knew that in a few days we muſt inevitably
periſh for want. In this ſituation, I
took a reſolution to go out in the cloſe of the
evening and ſolicit the charity of the benevolent.
I told my tale of ſorrow to many of
my own ſex. They either heard me not, or
diſbelieved my aſſertions, and after sauntering
through the ſtreets near three hours, one
cold wet night in October, I at length collected
about ſix-pence, and with it having
procured ſome trifling nouriſhment for my
almoſt famiſhed parent, I returned, allowing
myſelf only a halfpenny roll. When I carried
my little morſel to her bedſide, ſhe
[Page 026]
anxiouſly enquired how I had procured it.
“Some charitable diſpoſed perſon,” ſaid I,
“gave me the means; take it my mother,
eat and be comforted.”
Sinking nature required ſupport; ſhe eat
the offered morſel, but ſeaſoned it with tears
of heartfelt anguiſh.
The next day I determined again to try
my new employment, and for that purpoſe
wandered out towards the park. It was Sunday,
the day was fine, I went in and ſeating
myſelf on a bench, looked at the gay throng
that crowded the mall, compared their situations
with my own, and began to think myself
the moſt unfortunate of human beings.
I knew I had never deviated from the path
of virtue; I had never committed any action
deſerving ſuch abject miſery, and I ſaw
many women who had forfeited all claim to
honour and reſpect, enjoying all the luxuries
of life. At that moment reaſon, religion, integrity
forſook me; and I wiſhed myſelf in
the ſame ſituation with thoſe victims to vice,
if by ſo doing, I could procure ſuſtenance for
my mother.
You will, perhaps aſk, my dear Celia, if
we had no friends whatever, to whom we
could apply for relief; alas! my dear girl, you
[Page 027]
know nothing of the world; thoſe who have
drank deep of the cup of affliction can tell,
that poverty and friendſhip are utter strangers
to each other. While I was indulging
theſe painful reflections, an elderly gentlewoman,
ſeated herſelf beſide me, and viewing
my perſon and dreſs with a ſcrutinizing
eye, began ſome trifling diſcourſe, and at
length aſked me, if I was born in London.
From chatting at firſt on indifferent ſubjects,
we began to remark the different appearances
of the paſſing multitude. The old lady's
remarks were juſt and pertinent; her discourse
breathed the true ſpirit of philanthropy.
I imagined I had found a friend, and
without reſerve unboſomed myſelf to her;
related my ſtory of paſt and preſent diſtreſs;
ſhe heard me with attention, and, me
thought, I ſaw a gleam of compaſſion paſs
acroſs her features. I ſeized the propitious
moment, and in the humbleſt accent petitioned
relief.
“Poor child,” ſaid ſhe, “I believe your
ſtory to be true; innocence and ſimplicity,
are indeliably marked upon your countenance;
what is in my power I will do for
you, tho' the means are but ſmall.” She
then drew forth her purſe, and preſented
me with half a crown: it is only for thoſe
who have been in ſimilar circumſtances to
[Page 028]
concieve the tide of joy that ruſhed upon
my heart at the poſſeſſion of this little piece
of ſilver; I eagerly kiſſed the hand that
conveyed it to me, and would have ſpoke,
but tears were the only thanks I could return;
they were the ſincereſt, for they came
warm from the heart.
I left my ſeat with precipitation, and was
preparing to return home; but my benefactress
ſtopped me. “Miſs Howard,” ſaid
ſhe, “I believe I have it my power to ſerve
you; meet me here again to-morrow.” I
promiſed to meet her and returned to my
mother with a heart lightened of half its
ſorrows. No doubt, ſaid I, this lady will
endeavour to extricate us from our preſent
diſtreſs, and put us in ſome way of earning
future ſubſiſtance.
Elated with theſe hopes, I repaired next
day to the appointed place; but after having
waited two hours was obliged to return
without ſeeing my benefactreſs. Something
has detained her unexpectedly, ſaid I, ſhe
will undoubtedly come to-morrow: but to-morrow
paſſed as yeſterday had done, and I
was again diſappointed.
The third morning, tho' I had uſed the moſt
rigid economy, I found myſelf again
[Page 029]
pennyless. However, ſpiritleſs and miſerable as I
was, I determined once more to repair to the
park. My pace was ſlow, my looks dejected
and my eyes ſtreaming with tears. I had
hardly proceeded half the length of the mall,
when I heard myſelf called, and turning
round perceived my benefactreſs.
“My good girl,” ſaid ſhe, “I almoſt
feared I ſhould not meet you, I have been
obliged to go into the country ſince I ſaw you,
but I had not forgot you; come dry your
eyes, I have met with a gentleman who will
be your friend, if you mind how you behave
yourſelf. He has ſent you half a guinea;
and if you will come this evening and ſup at
my houſe, in Soho ſquare, I will introduce
you to him.”
“Alas! madam,” ſaid I, “my appearance
at your houſe will only diſgrace you;
nor can I ſuppoſe any gentleman will greatly
intereſt himſelf in behalf of a poor unfortunate
girl, without requiring a return which
virtue and religion will not ſuffer me to
make.”
“Don't be fooliſh, child,” ſaid the old
lady, “virtue and religion are very pretty
words; but pray tell me, will they keep your
mother from ſtarving.”
[Page 030]
“Oh! madam,” I replied, “will it not be
worſe than death to brand her name with infamy?
Alas! I never could bear the ſcorn
of the world, and the reproofs of my own
conſcience, oppreſſed with guilt and ſhame.
Tempt me not, dear madam, to forſake the
path of rectitude; let me retain my innocence,
and come what may, I ſhall die in
peace.”
“This is fine talking, Miſs Howard, but
let me tell you, it is a very ſelfiſh way of arguing.
You acknowledge, that the loſs of
virtue would make you unhappy. Are you
not already unhappy in a ſuperlative degree;
and does that unhappineſs in the leaſt contribute
to relieve your own or your mother's
wants. No, does not the ſight of your misery
rather increaſe hers? Come, then, my
dear girl, act the heroine, take this load of
ſorrow upon yourſelf, and ſave a parent,
whom you tenderly love, from periſhing with
famine.”
This was a ſtrange way of arguing, Celia,
yet it had the deſired effect, I thought it was
poſſible to hide my infamy from my mother,
and confine my miſery to my own boſom.
When the old woman found my reſolution
began to waver, ſhe plied me with sophistical
arguments, deſcribed in glowing colours
[Page 031]
the gaiety and ſplendor in which many women
of looſe characters lived, and contrasted
it ſtrongly with my poor miſerable apartment,
where my ſure attendants were pinching
cold and hunger, and my only companion
a beloved parent ſinking under the complicated
evils of ſickneſs and famine.
“Oh! ſave me! ſave me!” cried I eagerly,
“from the dreadful thought, teach
me how to ſnatch her from impending destruction,
to adminiſter ſupport to her wasting
frame, and comfort her declining hours.
Do with me as you will; ſave, protect my
dear mother, and let me be the only sacrifice.”
Having brought me to this horrible resolution,
and received my promiſe of coming
to her houſe in the evening; ſhe left me,
and I repaired home; by the way procuring
a bottle of wine and ſome other neceſſaries
for my mother. She had been anxious at
my long ſtay, and when I produced the refreshments,
again enquired how I had purchased
them. A lie, (the ſirſt I had ever
told her) now ſuggeſted itſelf; I ſaid I had
performed a little work for a lady in the
neighbourhood, and ſhe had liberally rewarded
me; but when I mentioned going
out again in the evening, the pathetic
[Page 032]
manner in which ſhe intreated me to guard my
honour, as my only treaſure, and as I wished
to preſerve her heart from breaking,
almoſt ſtaggered my reſolution: but having
given her ſome refreſhment, I ſaw her spirits
revive, and that by degrees ſhe ſunk into
a ſweet refreſhing ſlumber. I determined
to ſacrifice every other conſideration rather
than ſee her reduced again to the extremity
of miſery ſhe had ſo lately experienced.
Oh! ye rigidly virtuous of my own ſex,
turn not from me with horror and contempt,
conſider my agonizing diſtreſs, glance with
an eye of compaſſion over the dreadful resolution,
and let a tear of pity blot the offence
from your memories.
Great and painful were the ſtruggles of
my ſoul, while gazing on my ſleeping parent.
I knelt by the bedſide, and would
have prayed, but, alas! that conſolation was
denied me. How could I addreſs a Being
of infinite purity, when I was going to offer
myſelf a ſacrifice at the ſhrine of guilt and
pollution. I thought I ſhould have ſunk under
the agonies I endured; once I wiſhed
for death, but then the thought of what my
poor mother would ſuffer, immediately repelled
the impious deſire; at length, I clasped
my hands and raiſing my eyes to
[Page 033]
heaven, cried, “Father of mercy direct me, oh!
give me fortitude to bear thy diſpenſations
as I ought, or pardon the weakneſs of an
afflicted mortal.” I then kiſſed my ſleeping
mother, and with a heart almoſt broken repaired
to Soho.
The old woman received me cordially, but
reproved my penſive countenance and ſwolen
eyes; ſhe made me drink ſome tea, and
then taking me up ſtairs, inſiſted on my
dreſſing myſelf in a brown luteſtring nightgown,
with a cap and linen ſuitable. We
then went into an elegant parlour, and in a
few moments Mr. Welldon was announced:
he was a man upwards of thirty, of a comely
perſon, polite addreſs, and inſinuating
manner; he regarded me with viſible attention,
and when he ſpoke to me, it was with
a mixture of reſpect and polite freedom.
My feelings during ſupper were beyond description,
poignant: I could ſcarcely reſtrain
my tears, but the reproving looks of the
old woman told me how much they would
offend her: I therefore endeavoured to ſtiſle
my emotions; but when the cloth was removed
and ſhe aroſe to quit the room, I involuntarily
caught her hand, and with a look
which pleaded ſtrongly for compaſſion burſt
into tears.
[Page 034]
“Why, what does the girl cry for?” ſaid
ſhe ſneeringly, “was it not by your own desire
you came here? come, Mr. Welldon, you
muſt get the better of theſe pretty airs, tho'
perhaps, indeed you may think her the more
agreeable for them.” Then diſengaging her
hand from my graſp, ſhe left the room.
“Then I am inevitably loſt,” cried I,
claſping my hands in a wild agony, and redoubling
my tears. “My ſweet girl,” ſaid
Mr. Welldon, “this diſtreſs, which is too
acute, to be conſtrued into affectation, greatly
ſupriſes me. Was it not by your own
free will that you came here to meet me?”
“It was, it was,” ſaid I, “but oh! ſir, if
you only knew the anguiſh it has coſt me,
to form the horrid deſign, you would pity
me, indeed you would commiſerate my sufferings.”
“Dear creature,” ſaid he, drawing his
chair cloſe to mine, “you know not how
greatly your ſorrow intereſts me; tell me,
is there any thing within the compaſs of my
fortune, can reſtore peace to your agitated
boſom; ſay how can I ſerve you, how render
you happy?”
[Page 035]
“Oh! there is one way, and only one
way,” ſaid I, “by which you can promote
my happineſs,” and I dropped on my knees
before him. “Riſe, riſe, my dear girl,”
ſaid he, “and do not heſitate to point out
this only way, by which I can prove myſelf
your friend.”
“This humliating poſture beſt ſuits me,”
I replied, “here will I remain till I move
your heart to compaſſion: indeed I am not
that vile creature you may perhaps think
me. I always avoided the inticements of
vice till this fatal night; but the miſeries of
a beloved parent, ſinking to the grave, oppressed
by ſickneſs and poverty drove me
to ſacrifice my honour, to procure the
means of prolonging her invaluable existence:
if you are ſincere in your profeſſions
of friendſhip, relieve my dear mother, and
oh! I beſceeh you, ſpare the virtue of her
wretched daughter.”
“Riſe, then, my afflicted girl,” ſaid he,
“you ſhall be convinced of my ſincerity; I
will obey the dictates of humanity; we will
inſtantly go to your mother.” He then left
me for a few moments, when returning, he
led me to a coach, and taking my direction,
ordered the coachman to drive to our poor
habitation. I heſitated at going away in the
[Page 036]
cloaths the old woman had made me put on,
but my deliverer told me he had paid for
them.
When we arrived at our lodging, a mixed
ſenſation of pain and pleaſure dwelt upon
my mind, and as I ran up ſtairs my limbs
trembled ſo, they would ſcarce ſupport me;
Mr. Welldon followed me up: I opened
the door of the apartment, and ruſhing to
the bedſide, cried “ſee my dear mother,
the friend which heaven hath ſent us.” My
poor mother raiſed herſelf feebly in the bed,
looked firſt at me, then at Mr. Welldon, then
pointing to my altered dreſs and crying “theſe
are the wages of infamy, all but this I could
have born patiently.” She fell back in a fit.
I thought ſhe was gone forever; frantic
with deſpair, I tore off the dreſs which had ſo
much alarmed her, and throwing myſelf on
the bed beſide her, vowed never more to riſe,
but that my life ſhould expiate my intended
offence. Mr. Welldon had ran away for
medical aſſiſtance, and entered the room
with an apothecary, juſt as my mother gave
ſome ſigns of returning life. Proper remedies
were immediately applied and Mr. Welldon
ſoon convinced my reviving parent,
that I had not entailed infamy on her latter
days, or haſtened the period of her exiſtence
by guilt or ſhame.
[Page 037]
Our generous benefactor, now ſupplied
me with money, not only to procure every
neceſſary, but every comfort of life; and
engaged the apothecary to attend my mother
every day: but his care was all in
vain; her diſorder daily gained ground, and
I ſaw her end rapidly approaching. One
day, when Mr. Welldon called to ſee us, my
mother beckoned him to the bedſide. “Sir,”
ſaid ſhe, “if the prayers of a poor dying
mortal are heard in heaven, you will undoubtedly
be rewarded for your benevolence,
towards a helpleſs widow and orphan.
To your generoſity I owe the honour of my
child: oh! may ſhe never again be tempted
to doubt the care of a watchful providence;
and to avoid a temporary evil, ruſh
into laſting miſery. To your care Mr. Welldon
I commit her, poor and defenceleſs as
ſhe is; I do not fear your integrity; for the
man, who in the gay hour of uncontrouled
paſſion could ſave an innocent creature from
deſtruction, will never lay a deliberate plan
for her ſeduction. Meriel, you muſt be
humble and induſtrious, and truſt heaven
for ſupport.” Mr. Welldon promiſed he
would be my guardian and protector from
every evil. “I place an implicit confidence
in your word,” ſaid my mother, “and ſhall
die in peace.”
[Page 038]
“Oh! my dear Meriel,” continued ſhe,
faintly graſping my hand, “mayſt thou be
virtuous and happy, and may the Omnipotent
preſerve thee thro' life.”
Celia, I feel I am unable to proceed, the
moment that ſevered me from my dear mother
will be always remembered as the moſt
painful of my life. Adieu till I am more
compoſed.
MERIEL.
[Page 039]
LETTER XXVIII.
MERIEL to CELIA.
December 25 th , 1778.
I again ſit down to proceed in my melancholy
narrative; a month from the
time of my dear mother's death muſt be passed
over in ſilence; my affliction was poignant,
but time and the efforts of reaſon by
degrees ſoftened it. Mr. Welldon ſuffered
that time to elapſe before he ventuted to
ſee me; he had placed me with a friend of
his, who is a milliner, and tho' he ſent
every day to enquire after my health, he
avoided viſiting me, fearing the cenſure of
the world might injure my reputation. My
grief being in a great meaſure abated, Mrs.
Lacour took an opportunity of ſpeaking to
me concerning my future proſpects in life:
“Mr. Welldon,” ſaid ſhe, “intends, if you
approve the plan, that you ſhall remain with
me till you have attained a competent
[Page 040]
knowledge of the millinery buſineſs, to be able to
ſupport yourſelf without being any longer
troubleſome to your benefactor. I know,
Miſs Howard,” continued ſhe, “that Mr.
Welldon does not think you an incumbrance,
and that you are in no danger of
any improper attempts from him; as I have
heard him ſay the innate goodneſs of your
heart has raiſed you ſo in his eſteem, that he
regards you in the light of a ſiſter; and as
ſuch will ſerve and protect you: but my
dear young lady, you are poſſeſſed of ſtrong
ſenſibility and to ſuch a heart as your's dependance
muſt be a heavy burthen. As
another motive for your endeavouring to
render yourſelf independent, I muſt inform
you that Mr. Welldon will in a few weeks
be married, and however innocent your
mind, believe me the world will readily caſt
illiberal cenſures on a young woman who
lived in a ſtate of dependance on a married
man; and ſhould it reach his lady's ears
might be the ſource of great uneaſineſs, if
not the cauſe of an irreparable breach between
them.”
I was convinced of the propriety of theſe
arguments, and chearfully acquieſced, while
my heart overflowed with gratitude towards
my generous benefactor, and I breathed a
ſilent prayer to heaven, that his felicity in
[Page 041]
the married ſtate might be equal to his deserts.
A few days after this, Mr. Welldon called.
I could not refrain my tears at ſight of
this worthy man. Paſt ſcenes of ſorrow
ruſhed upon my mind, which joined to the
recollection of my then forlorn, dependant
ſituation almoſt overcame me. He ſuffered
me to eaſe my full heart, and then gently
enquiring after my health, and how I liked
Mrs. Lacour's family, hinted at my remaining
with her, till I had attained a competent
knowledge of her buſineſs.
“I know, my dear Miſs Howard,” ſaid
he, “that your education and accomplishments
fit you to be placed in a more elevated
ſphere. But my good girl muſt conſider
that thoſe accompliſhments in her preſent
circumſtances will be of no uſe. Nay, if
they are ſuffered to appear will only excite
the envy and ill nature of thoſe with whom
ſhe is at preſent obliged to aſſociate. I would
by no means have you neglect thoſe brilliant
talents, with which nature has endowed you.
It is not to be doubted, but you will find leisure
hours when the pen or the pencil will be
a happy relief to your mind, and prevent
your dwelling too intently on paſt melancholy
events. But let thoſe hours of relax
[Page ]
[Page 043]
months. Mr. Welldon then told me he had
provided me an apartment to myſelf, and
begged my acceptance of the furniture it
contained. “This day three weeks, Miſs
Howard,” ſaid he, “will make me the happiest
of men in a union with a young lady
of great merit, on whom I have deſervedly
placed my affections. We ſhall ſet off immediately
on a viſit to the continent to ſee
ſome relations, who reſide conſtantly in the
ſouth of France, ſo that it may be a long
time before I ſee you again. In this little
pocket-book you will find a trifle to anſwer
your immediate expences, and a direction
to a gentleman, in the city, where in caſe of
any future exigencies, you may apply, and he
will give you both aſſiſtance and advice.
God bleſs you, my dear girl; you have my
beſt wiſhes, and may reſt aſſured of my unalterable
friendſhip.” He then ſaluted me
with the affection of a brother, and took his
leave.
Soon after he was gone, Mrs. Lacour,
by way of diverting my mind from the gloom
our parting had caſt over it, aſked me if I
had no curioſity to ſee the apartment Mr.
Welldon had furniſhed for me. I followed
her up two pair of ſtairs, into a neat back
room, where was a tent bed, of ſtriped Manchester,
with every neceſſary apurtenance,
[Page 044]
a caſe of drawers, a neat dreſſing caſe, and
a ſmall trunk, the key of which Mrs. Lacour
gave me, and bidding me with a ſmile
examine my treaſures, went down ſtairs.
On opening the trunk I found it contained
a piece of grey luteſtring, two pieces of dark
chintz, each enough for a gown, about ten
yards of muſlin, and a piece of fine linen.
Removing theſe, I diſcovered at the bottom,
a neat edition of the Engliſh poets, together
with a bible and common prayer book; here
alſo, I found a roll of drawing paper, which
led me to imagine I was ſupplied with other
materials for this elegant amuſement, and on
opening the drawers, I found I had not been
deceived in my conjectures; for there I
found a box of crayons, pencils and colours,
and a leather writing caſe, in which was a
letter of truely brotherly advice. On opening
a light cloſet that adjoined my bed chamber,
I diſcovered another mark of the friendly
attention of my benefactor; for there
was a ſmall piano forte, with a collection of
muſic by the beſt maſters. My little pocket-book
contained a bank note for fifty pounds.
Oppreſſed by a ſenſe of theſe numerous
obligations, my heart almoſt burſting with
grateful emotions, I ſunk on my knees by
the bed ſide, and poured forth my thanks
[Page 045]
to the great Diſpoſer of all things, entreated
that the choiceſt of his bleſſings might
be ſhowered on my benefactor, and prayed
his mercy ever to protect and direct me,
nor ſuffer me again, impiouſly to doubt his
power and watchful care.
The next morning, I entered on my new
employment with alacrity. It is an employment
that keeps the mind continually amufed.
Mrs. Lacour is an amiable, chearful
woman, and ſome of her young people, sensible,
well informed girls. I do not like
Mr. Lacour: he appears to me a pert, illiterate
coxcomb. But this does not give me
any great uneaſineſs, as I am not much in
his company, except at meal times. When
the buſineſs of the day is finiſhed, I retire to
my own apartment, where writing, reading
or muſic, ſweetly relaxes and chears my
mind: the time never hangs heavy; I feel
a charming ſerenity pervade my heart, and
Hope, that bright celeſtial gueſt, again has
taken up her reſidence in my boſom. On
a Sundy evening, I never fail viſiting the
dear ſpot, that contains all that was earthly
of my beloved mother. I cannot deſcribe
my ſenſations when I approach the place.
They are far from painful Celia, for the
remembrance of her piety and virtue is a
balm to my heart; and while my eye is
[Page 046]
fixed on the grave where ſhe lies, my mental
faculties behold her bleſſed ſpirit beatified,
and enjoying the fullneſs of heavenly
bliſs in that manſion, where, I truſt, I ſhall
one day again embrace her. When I return
from theſe contemplations, my ſoul is
ſo attuned to harmony, that I ſing the hymns
or anthems ſuited to the day, with a pleasure
undeſcribable. I have wrote a few
lines, which you will find fully expreſſive
of the frame of my mind. I cannot help
regreting, my deareſt friend, the happy
days I ſpent with you in the convent, tho'
all-chearing Hope bids me look forward;
and while I take my preſent lot with gratitude,
humbly aſpire to a bleſſed hereafter.
Encloſed are the lines I mention; I ſing it
to that ſweet plaintive air, we were both ſo
fond of. I ſhall ſometimes pleaſe myſelf
with the thought, that we may perhaps after
you have received this, both ſing it at the
ſame moment. God bleſs you my dear
Celia.
MERIEL.
[Page 047]
TO HOPE.
OH! ceaſe, vain buſy fancy ceaſe
                           To dwell on ſcenes long paſt,
When every hour was wing'd with peace,
                           With joy too great to laſt.
But come, ſweet Hope, celeſtial pow'r,
                           Thy healing comfort bring;
Oh ſooth my mind, and let me ſoar
                           Upon thine airy wing.
When thro' the vaulted aiſle I roam,
                           And breath the ſigh ſincere,
Or o'er my mother's hallowed tomb
                           Drop the ſad filial tear:
'Tis thou canſt chear the ſolemn hour,
                           Canſt peace and comfort bring,
Elate my thoughts, and bid them ſoar,
                           Upon thine airy wing.
Methinks I hear thee whiſp'ring ſay;
                           Mortal, thy tears give o'er,
Thy mother, thou in realms of day,
                           Shalt meet to part no more.
Sooth'd by thy words, benignant power,
                           My ſoul exulting ſprings,
And tow'rd the ſky, with rapture ſoars
                           Upon thine airy wings.
[Page 048]
LETTER XXIX.
MERIEL to CELIA.
January 10 th , 1779.
There is in this family a Mademoiſelle
Bagatelle, who is Mrs. Lacour's forewoman;
I do not like her, Celia, ſhe dreſſes
in the extremity of the faſhion, takes ſnuff,
rouges high, and is high in the good graces
of Monſieur Lacour. I can percieve they
perfectly underſtand each other, tho' the
prudent wife either does not, or will not, ſee
the intimacy that ſubſiſts between them.
It has often been a ſubject of wonder to
me, how people, whoſe tempers and dispositions
are the very reverſe of each other,
could voluntarily put on the hymeneal yoke
together; and yet we daily ſee inſtances of
ſenſe and folly; virtue and vice; understanding
and ignorance; politeneſs and vulgarity;
youth and age; beauty and
[Page 049]
deformity, being linked in the ſame chain: nay,
what is more ſurpriſing that both parties
eagerly put it on. How are we to account
for theſe inconſiſtencies in human nature,
nothing can be more oppoſite than the dispositions
of Monſieur and Mrs. Lacour, and
yet I have been told that it was a marriage
of inclination and on the lady's ſide, entirely
againſt the approbation of her friends;
hence we muſt ſuppoſe, that either love
throws a miſt over the diſcerning optics of
its votaries, or that their is a fate in marriage,
which it is impoſſible to counteract.
You will, perhaps, wonder, my dear Celia,
that among the many long epiſtles I
have lately wrote to you, the name of Rainsforth
has never eſcaped me: indeed, I have
had afflictions of ſo much heavier a nature,
than merely the loſs of a lover, that ſome
months paſſed in which I hardly remembered
there was ſuch a perſon in being: however
in my preſent ſituation, being more eaſy in
my mind, thought has frequently recurred
to the period when I expected to have been
united to him by indiſſoluble ties. When I
think of him, I am feelingly convinced that
my heart is ſtill attached; I almoſt doubt
the intelligence of his infidelity, tho' conveyed
to me by the hand of his father: I feel
a reſtleſs curioſity to be informed of his
[Page 050]
happineſs; I fancy, ſometimes that he might
have heard reports to my diſadvantage; he
might have been informed of my unfortunate
elopement, of my thoughtleſs correspondence
with Pringle: every circumſtance
may have been exaggerated; and he may not
be ſo culpable as I at firſt thought him.
Theſe ideas often crowd my imagination.
But he is married, Celia, and let his virtues
be ever ſo briliant, he can be nothing to me.
I have heard by mere accident that my
brother is in a fair way of making his fortune
in India; I have wrote to him ſeveral
times, but recieved no anſwer; not even
a line has arrived from him, ſince the bill,
which I mentioned in a former letter, was
paid. Mr. Moſſop's family are I find removed
into the country, and as to any of thoſe
who called themſelves my friends in the day
of proſperity, if I meet them now they ſtare
me confidently in the face, but do not in the
leaſt recollect me. Mrs. Lacour, tells me,
that when fortune removes friends to any
conſiderable diſtance from each other, the
party who is the favourite of the fickle goddess
almoſt immediately becomes near-fighted,
and is afflicted with a ſhort memory.
[Page 051]
January 19 th .
I was yeſterday ſent to wait on a lady with
ſome caps, &c. in St. James's ſquare. When
having waited about half an hour in a cold
empty parlour, I thought I heard a voice
that was familiar to my ears, but could not
recollect whoſe it was. I was ſtriving to call
it to my memory in vain, when the door
opened, and who ſhould I behold but Miſs
Pringle, and another young lady. “Come
into this room young woman,” ſaid ſhe,
“here is a fire, and we will look over your
trumpery.” I went in my heart ſinking as
I moved; for I knew enough of this once
affectionate friend to ſuppoſe ſhe would not
readily acknowledge an acquaintance with
a milliner's apprentice. I ſaw, the moment
ſhe caſt her eyes on me, ſhe recollected
me; but as I did not wiſh to ſhew an inclination
to renew our acquaintance, I caſt
down my eyes and remained ſilent, thinking
that if ſhe did not chooſe to take notice of
me, ſhe might ſettle it within herſelf that I
did not know her. But the lady's curioſity
was more predominent than her pride. She
looked at me ſeveral times and at length
cried “if I did not think it almoſt impossible
I ſhould ſay your name was Howard.”
“My name is Howard, ma'am,” ſaid I coldly.
“Why, ſure as I am alive, it is Meriel
[Page 052]
Howard.” “The very ſame, Miſs Pringle.”
“La! my dear girl, why how came you in
this ſituation, ſuch a fortune as you had left
you.” “We are all ſubject to viciſſitudes
of fortune,” ſaid I ſmiling, “but I am extremely
happy in my preſent ſituation.”
“Happy!” ſaid ſhe, lifting up her eyes in
ſurprize. “I am aſtoniſhed to hear you ſay
ſo, for my part I ſhould be the moſt miserable
creature on earth, was I reduced to carry
a band-box.” “Happineſs and miſery,
Miſs,” ſaid I, “are in general the reſult of
our own ideas: if I am content in my humble
ſtation, I am in my own mind as happy,
nay, perhaps happier than the woman, who
riding in a chariot and pair, envies one whoſe
ſuperior fortune can command four or ſix
horſes.”
She did not ſeem to comprehend me, but
turning to the other lady, ſaid, “well I vow
ſiſter it is very aſtoniſhing; but this young
woman, only four years ago, had a fortune
of four thouſand pounds, her father lived
in the neighbourhood of our countryhouse.
My brother was very fond of her
once, and I believe ſhe did not altogether
diſlike him, did you Meriel? I fancy your
little heart never regained its liberty.”
[Page 053]
“I rather ſuppoſe, Miſs Pringle, that it
never was a captive. If at one time I was
fooliſh enough to fancy myſelf in love with
your brother, it was before I had the power
of diſtinguiſhing a real from an ideal paſſion,
or before I was a competent judge of what
would be moſt conducive to my own happiness.”
“Aye,” ſaid ſhe, “you can talk of it with
a great deal of compoſure now, but you certainly
was very fond of him once or you would
not have reſolved to run away with him;
nay, can you deny that you were out of your
ſenſes about him, when you heard he was
married.”
This cruel reflection on my unfortunate
malady, which was occaſioned by the severest
affliction that ever child indured, was
more than my ſpirits could ſupport, I turned
my face from her to to hide the tears that trickled
faſt from my eyes; but could not command
my voice to give her an anſwer, when
ſhe continued: “Well, but where are Mr.
and Mrs. Howard, and maſter Richard?”
“My brother is in India—I have no parents.”
“Poor, dear girl,” ſaid the other young
lady, now ſpeaking for the firſt time, “that
is a dreadful thing. I know what it is to
[Page 054]
have no parents.” She took my hand, and
I ſaw her mild eyes gliſten with compaſſion.
I wiſhed to put an end to this painful
converſation, and therefore deſired to know
if they would keep any of the caps. “Oh,
yes, I ſhall have ſeveral, but ſtop Meriel, I
muſt let my mother know you are here.
Dear, how ſhe will be ſurprized; and you
ſhall go down to Baker, ſhe will pay you,
and do have a glaſs of wine before you go,
and a bit of bride cake: you don't know I
am married.”
“I wiſh you much happineſs madam,”
ſaid I, coldly; “but I cannot ſtay to take
any refreſhment: I have been here much
longer than I ought to have ſtaid.” You
muſt know, my dear Celia, that my pride
was hurt at the idea of ſtanding firſt to be
catechiſed by the mother, and then be dismissed
to the houſe-keeper for wine and
cake; and this treatment from a girl, who
once called herſelf my friend, and thought
herſelf honoured by the title. However, I
could not eſcape; the mother was called,
and the bell rang for Mrs. Baker. I answered
Mrs. Pringle's queſtions in as ſhort
a manner as poſſible; but obſtinately refused
going down with the houſe-keeper.
“Ah! poor girl,” ſaid Mrs. Pringle, in an
[Page 055]
affected whiſper to her daughter; “let the
wine be brought up, my dear; you ſee ſhe
cannot as yet ſubmit to the alteration in her
ſituation.”
“You are miſtaken madam,” ſaid I,
“I do not feel the leaſt embaraſſment from
the reflection that I owe my ſupport to industry:
it is what many, more worthy than
myſelf are obliged to do, it is by no means
humiliating. True dignity is ſeated in the
ſoul, nor can any ſituation make me forget
the reſpect ever due to myſelf. I cannot
but reflect ladies, that I am the ſame Miſs
Howard, whom ſome few years ago, you
were ſo extremely fond of, and eagerly
ſtriving which could ſhew her the moſt respect.
Tho' I am now bereaved of that fortune,
which I percieve was the magnet
which attracted your attentions. I can make
proper diſtinctions; as a trades perſon, I
can eaſily ſubmit to be turned over to your
houſe-keeper for payment; but remembering
I have once been your companion, am
ſtill your equal, I cannot ſubmit to be
placed on a level with your ſervants.”
They could not anſwer. Shame and
aſtoniſhment tied their tongues. I curtſied
ſlightly and followed Mrs. Baker out of the
room. While ſhe was paying me, the loquacious
[Page 056]
quacious houſe-keeper informed me that her
maſter had been married about three weeks;
that he never ſaw Miſs Pringle till within a
month of their union; that he danced with
her at a ball, and was ſtruck with her pleasing
perſon, and inſinuating manner; “but
I can ſee,” continued ſhe, “it will not be a
very happy union; and Miſs Sally, poor
girl, will be more unhappy than ever. It
was a ſad thing, ſir John left her dependant
on her brother.” “What then,” ſaid
I, “your maſter is a baronet?” “No,”
ſaid ſhe, “his father was a knight, but the
title died with him. He was a wealthy
citizen, and was knignted for carrying an
addreſs to the king on ſome particular occasion.”
I had now recieved my money, and
not wiſhing to pry into the ſecrets of a family,
with whom I deſired not to form any
connection, I wiſhed Mrs. Baker a good
morning, and left the houſe. In the hall I
met Miſs Sally. “You will have a long
walk Miſs Howard,” ſaid ſhe; “had I any
command here, you ſhould not carry that
heavy box.”
“It is not heavy, Miſs,” ſaid I.
“But it is cumberſome,” ſhe replied,
“and you are not accuſtomed to ſuch
employment.” She then opened the door
[Page 057]
herſelf, and ſmiling, with a ſweet look of
benevolence, wiſhed me a good morning. I
pitied the dear girl, for ſure I am, if ſhe is
dependant on her brother, her new ſiſter
will not contribute to make her life very
comfortable.
As I walked home, I could not avoid reflecting
on this rencounter with Miſs Pringle;
nor did my heart entirely approve my
own conduct: there was too much pride in
the manner in which I ſpoke to her: indeed,
ſince I have been poor, Celia, I have
diſcovered that I am very proud, much more
ſo than is becoming; I will endeavour to
correct this error, and in future adapt my
ſentiments to the ſtation in which it has
pleaſed Providence to place me.
I have met with many civilities from ſome
of Mrs. Lacour's cuſtomers; eſpecially a
Mrs. Moreton, who is a woman of very genteel
fortune, at leaſt, if I am to conjecture
from the manner in which ſhe lives: ſhe is
very fond of poetry, and has adviſed me to
endeavour to raiſe a ſubſcription for the publication
of thoſe poems I formerly mentioned
to you. Mrs. Lacour does not disapprove
the plan, and I am by this indulging
woman, allowed more time to purſue my
favourite ſtudy, than I ſhould have met with
[Page 058]
in any other place. I have obtained ſeveral
very reſpectable names to my ſubſcription;
and have ſome cards of propoſals printed
which I keep in the ſhop to preſent to the
ladies who conſtantly frequent it. I cannot
ſay, Celia, but it would be much more pleasing
to me, could I obtain a living by the exertion
of any of my natural talents, than by
following the ſtraight forward path of the
plodding woman of buſineſs; beſides I was
never deſigned for a milliner, I cannot flatter,
I cannot tell a woman whom age, and
other natural defects, have rendered extremely
plain, that a full dreſs cap with artificial
flowers ſmall handkerchief, and all
the gay trappings that belong to the ſmiling
ſeaſon of eighteen, will become her face and
figure: and yet this is a very neceſſary ingredient
in the compoſition of a milliner.
I wiſh to my heart ſome other plan could
be ſtruck out, where I ſhould not be obliged
to ſay and atteſt things ſo directly contrary
to my own opinion. I am not ſo happy in
this family as I at firſt thought I ſhould be,
Mr. Lacour pays me too much attention
lately; I hate the forward concieted fellow,
tho' were it only to mortify Mademoiſelle I
could take a pleaſure in liſtening to his nonsense;
but when I reflect that by ſo doing I
may wound the peace of a deſerving woman,
who treats me with tenderneſs, and favours
[Page 059]
me with her eſteem, I feel ſuch a mixture of
horror end deteſtation riſe in my heart, that
I frequently anſwer his paſſionate ſallies with
an acrimony, that makes him bite his lips
with vexation. I ſhall be glad when my time
is expired, tho' I have as yet thought of no
elligible plan to purſue in future. Adieu, my
friend, believe in every change of fortune
I am your's affectionately.
MERIEL.
[Page 060]
LETTER XXX.
MERIAL to CELIA, Letter
July 15 th , 1780.
Again , my beloved Celia, am I caſt
upon the world without a friend to
guide me; ſcarcely yet have I ſeen twenty
years, and what viciſſitudes of fortune have
I experienced. In my laſt I mentioned my
deſign of publiſhing ſome poems by subscription;
but in that deſign I am diſappointed,
as well as in every other from which I have
ever hoped to extract either pleaſure or
comfort.
About a month ſince I recieved the following
letter, from the gentleman to whom
Mr. Welldon gave me a direction; I transcribe
it for your peruſal, that you may ſee
how unfortunate I am in having the moſt
innocent actions of my life wreſted in ſuch a
manner as to be made to appear to my disadvantage.
[Page 061]
Enclosure
Friday-ſtreet, May 3 d .
MISS HOWARD,
WHEN your friend, Mr. Welldon, left
England he did not propoſe ſtaying above
ſix weeks or two months at moſt; but unfortunately
for him he has been detained on
the continent by a continued ſeries of ill
health, and he is now at Aix-la-Chappelle
in a very dangerous ſtate. When laſt I ſaw
him he gave me a very particular account of
your firſt acquaintance with him, an account
which I muſt confeſs raiſed you both in my
opinion, as it proved the goodneſs of your
hearts: he alſo informed me in what manner
he had placed you with Mrs. Lacour, and
deſired I would frequently call and enquire
how you went on, and whether you were
ſatisfied with the treatment you received.
Family uneaſineſs, and various vexations
have prevented my fulfilling my promise,
till laſt Thurſday, when I called at Mrs.
Lacour's, and the reſult of that viſit leads
me to trouble you with this letter; for as I
muſt naturally feel intereſted in the welfare
of every one dear to Mr. Welldon, I think it
my duty to give you a little advice, and to
let you know in what light you are
[Page 062]
considered by the major part of the family where
you reſide. At the time I made my viſit
you were out, waiting on ſome ladies: Mrs.
Lacour ſpoke of you in the tendereſt manner,
but ſaid you were by no means calculated
for the buſineſs Mr. Welldon had
placed you in; her ſenſibility is very great
ſir, ſaid ſhe, and her notions ſo very refined
and delicate, ſhe is totally unable to bear the
rude and often inſulting manners of many
of our cuſtomers: beſides, ſir, ſhe loves study
too well ever to make any great proficient
at her needle. Mrs. Lacour being called
away, a pert, forward French woman undertook
to finiſh your character: ſhe threw
out the moſt malignant aſperſions on your
conduct in general, ſaid you had made yourself
the laughing ſtock of the whole family,
that many of the ladies who frequented the
ſhop, diſtinguiſhed you by the appellation of
little ſcribbler: that you were thoughtleſs,
extravagant, proud, vain, and indolent: and
that you had by your artful conduct alienated
the affection of monſieur Lacour from his
wife, and in all theſe aſſertions ſhe wss joined
by her companions, who ſeemed to conſider
you only as a fit object of ridicule.
Tho' I could not avoid ſeeing the motive
that inſtigated theſe women was envy, yet
the reviewers call it ſad traſh, and my lady
[Page 063]
I muſt think you have not conducted yourself
altogether in the prudent manner I
ſhould have expected from the character Mr.
Welldon gave of you. Conſider Miſs Howard,
induſtry is the only hope you can have
of future ſupport: let me conjure you therefore,
as a friend, to throw aſide the pen,
and apply to your needle, and let your inventive
fancy be exerted to decorate the
perſons of your fair country women. Believe
me, the hill of Parnaſſus is too high
for you to climb, unleſs you had the hand
of independance to help you up; the fineſt
turned poem will be entirely overlooked by
the world when uſhered into it by an obscure
author; while a raphſody of nonſenſe
will be univerſally read and applauded when
the author is publicly known to be favoured
with the ſmiles of fortune. We will ſuppoſe,
my dear, that you had finiſhed a pleaſing
elegant poem, eſſay, novel, or what not;
and that ſome bookſeller ſhould for a trifling
conſideration engage to introduce it to public
notice; a new publication no ſooner
makes it appearance than the people of
faſhion enquire, who the author is. “Have
you read the new poem my lady?” ſays ſir
Timothy Trifle. “No not I, is it good for
any thing?” “'Pon honour I don't know,
Pedegree told me it was wrote by a little
milliner, who lived at Lacour's,”
[Page 064]
“Prithee, dear ſir Timothy, no more, I
am quite ſick already; what can a milliner's
girl know of litirature?” Thus my dear,
you will find people of faſhion will not give
your book a peruſal: and tho' there are
ſome few who may read it with pleaſure,
and give it the encomiums its merit deſerves,
they will be aſhamed to avow an opinion
contrary to that of their ſuperiors; while
the generality of the world ſatisfied with
the ſentence already paſſed, will not be at
the trouble of reading and judging for themselves:
the conſequence will be you will not
ſell enough to pay the expence of printing
and paper, and you will have the mortification
to ſee your poems uſed as waſte paper,
to wrap up parcels, &c.
I flatter myſelf, your natural good ſenſe
will lead you to conſider this letter in the
friendly light it was intended, that you will
do your utmoſt to cradicate from the minds
of your companions every idea they may have
formed to your diſadvantage, that you will
drop all thought of ſhining in the literary
world, and apply yourſelf chearfully to that
employment by which you may hope to paſs
through life with comfort and reſpectability.
I am, your ſincere wellwiſher,
H. FRIENDLY.
[Page 065]
Letter
The reception of this letter made me very
uneaſy, eſpecially the part which mentioned
the illneſs of my kind hearted benefactor:
I was grieved alſo to find what a bubble I
had been to Mademoiſelle and all the apprentices,
as they had all pretended to be
greatly pleaſed with my writings, and had
often ſaid it was a thouſand pities, ſo bright
a genius ſhonld be buried in oblivion: however
it opened my eyes to their deceit and
flattery; and I determined to be more upon
my guard in future. I felt extremely
grateful to Mr. Friendly for the trouble he
had taken in writing to me, anſwered his
letter immediately, promiſed to profit by his
advice, and reqneſted to be again favoured
with a few lines whenever he ſhould hear
from Mr. Welldon.
From this time I applied myſelf with
great aſſiduity to my employment; tho' I
could not help noticing a viſible alteration
in Mrs. Lacour's behaviour: ſhe became
cold and diſtant, frequently ſpoke to me in
a tone of diſpleaſure, and ſeemed carefully
to avoid my converſation, except what was
abſolutely neceſſary in the buſineſs. The
apprentices treated me with diſreſpect, and
Mademoiſelle aimed at me the moſt pointed
ſarcaſms. Things were in this ſituation,
when one day as I was ſitting penſive in a
[Page 066]
little back parlour, where we uſually breakfasted,
I was ſurpriſed by the ſudden entrance
of Monſieur Lacour, who began in
the uſual ſtrain to profeſs his admiration,
and audaciouſly ſolicited return of his illicit
paſſion.
“Your inſolence ſir,” ſaid I, “is insufferable,
I can no longer ſubmit to it, and if
ever again you ſhock my ears with ſuch infamous
ſolicitations I will inform your much
injured wife of your intimacy with Mademoiselle.”
I then would have left the room
but he threw himſelf between me and the
door, and ſeizing my hand, impudently
ſwore, my threat proceeded only from jealousy.
“But come my ſweet creature,” ſaid
he “do not let that make you uneaſy, I will
promiſe never to ſpeak to Bagatelle again.”
He then fell on his knees with a look of ludicrous
grimace, which at another time would
only have made me laugh: but at that time
I felt far different ſenſations. Unable to free
myſelf from his graſp, and hurt at the mean
opinion he entertained of me, all my fortitude
forſook me, and I burſt into tears. At
that moment the door opened, and in rushed
Mrs. Lacour, Mademoiſelle and Mr.
Friendly.
[Page 067]
“Oh Meriel!” cried Mrs. Lacour; “I
could not have believed”—She would have
fallen to the ground, had I not ſprang forward
to catch her as ſhe fainted.
“You ſee ſir,” ſaid Mademoiſelle to Mr.
Friendly, as we were ſupporting Mrs. Lacour
to a chair. “You ſee ſir, I told you
only the truth.” Monſieur, in the general
confuſion walked unobſerved away. My
diſtreſs was very great to ſee Mrs. Lacour
in this ſituation. I feared it might be of
dangerous conſequence, as ſhe was far advanced
in her pregnancy. I ſupported her
in my arms, chafed her temples with Hungary
water, and on the firſt return of life,
begged her not to think me ſo guilty as I
appeared. She ſhook her head, puſhed me
from her, and leaning on Mademoiſelle's
arm, went out of the room.
I then addreſſed Mr. Friendly as a stranger;
for I did not at that time perſonally
know him; and entreated he would endeavour
to heal this breach between Mrs. Lacour
and myſelf: “indeed ſir,” ſaid I, “ſhe
is the only friend I have; I would ſooner
die than injure her.” I then related briefly
every thing that had paſt, and fully explained
the cauſe of the tears he ſaw me ſhed.
[Page 068]
“Appearances are undoubtedly againſt
you Miſs Howard,” ſaid he, “but I am willing
to believe you innocent. I am extremely
ſorry there is any diſſention between you
and Mrs. Lacour, ſhe being as you have
juſt remarked, your only friend. I yesterday
received a letter from Mrs. Welldon,
informing me that her huſband died about
a fortnight ſince. She mentions you as a
perſon of whom Mr. Welldon ſpoke in his
laſt moments, and deſires me to give you
fifty pounds, to buy mourning; at the ſame
time ſhe bids me inform you it is the laſt
you will receive from her.”
I was ſo overcome, indeed I may ſay stupified
with grief, I was totally unable to answer.
He ſaw and I believe pitied my diſtreſs
and thus continued. “I have added to this
little preſent fifty pounds more; and would
adviſe you to leave this family immediately,
and in ſome genteel neighbourhood open a little
ſhop, endeavour to gain employment; be
prudent and induſtrious, and I have no doubt
of your ſucceſs; but prithee, good my girl,
burn your pens and paper, and believe me, a
woman makes as awkward a figure engaged in
literary purſuits, as a counſellor would do
ſeated at a tambour frame or buſied in assorting
colours for embroidery.” I promiſed to
[Page 069]
remember his friendly advice, he paid me
the money and took his leave.
I was now anxious to ſee Mrs. Lacour but
all attempts to that purpoſe were fruitleſs. I
wrote a letter proteſting my innocence and
received a verbal anſwer by one of the aprentices
that the thing was too plain to admit of
any doubt, that ſhe wiſhed me well but had
no deſire ever to ſee me again. I retired to
my apartment with a heart overcharged
with ſorrow. At any other time, the death
of my benevolent friend Mr. Welldon would
have been in itſelf a ſufficient affliction: but
now I had the additional one of knowing I
had tho, unintionally, injured the health of
a woman, I ſincerely eſteemed, incurred the
cenſures of the world, and caſt an indeliable
blemiſh on my reputation, which it had ever
been my ſtudy to preſerve unſullied. In theſe
melancholy reflections I paſt the day; in the
evening the ſervant brought me up a candle
and ſome ſupper: but I was too much agitated
to eat, and went early to bed, tho' I
was fully convinced that to ſleep would be
impoſſible.
About twelve o'clock I heard a great bustle
below, and fearing for Mrs. Lacour I
jumped out of bed and opening my chamber
door to liſten, plainly heard one of the young
[Page 070]
women ſay, “ſhe cannot live, the doctor
ſays it is impoſſible.” Terrified beyond measure
I put on a few cloaths and ran haſtily
down ſtairs, determined at all events to ſee
this dear ſufferer, and by convincing her of
my innocence reſtore her mind to peace.
The danger ſhe was in had thrown the family
into ſuch confuſion, that I found no opposition
made to my entering the appartment.
The curtains were cloſe drawn round the
bed, and there was little light in the room,
ſo that ſhe did not perceive me when I entered,
I found the agitation of her mind had
thrown her into a premature labour, and
that the ſurgeon imagined her life to be in
iminent danger. Every other thought was
now abſorbed in my anxiety for her. I beckoned
her ſiſter who was ſetting by the bedside.
She came to me, I told her the diſtreſs
of my mind and begged her to believe me
not guilty. “Dear Meriel,” ſaid ſhe, “I
never thought you ſo, nor would my poor
ſiſter have ever entertained an idea to your
prejudice, had it not been for the insinuations
of Bagatelle, who has now plainly discovered
the motive which led her ſo maliciously
to aſperſe your character: however no
one can now have a doubt of your innocence.
Mademoiſelle went out about eight
this evening, which greatly ſurpriſed us, as
my ſiſter was ſo ill. As the evening
[Page 071]
advanced, her abſcence became more astonishing,
and about an hour ſince a perſon called
who had ſeen Bagatelle and the ungrateful
Lacour get into a chaiſe at an inn door and
drive off for Dover.”
Tho' my heart bled for Mrs. Lacour, I
could not but rejoice that this proceeding of
theirs was a convicing proof of my innocence.
I inquired, if this unfortunate woman
had been informed of their perſidy,
and being anſwered in the affirmative, and
told that the intelligence had precipitated
her illneſs, I aſked, if I might be permited
to ſpeak to her. When ſhe was informed
that I was in the room, ſhe called me to her
with a faint voice, and taking hold of my
hand, ſaid, “Meriel, forgive me, I have
injured you; but I was myſelf decieved.”
She could not ſay more, her pains became
excruciating, and after continuing many
hours in a ſtate of exquiſite torture, ſhe resigned
her breath, having given birth to a
female infant who ſurvived her mother but
a few moments.
Lacour's flight, and his wife's death was
ſoon ſpread abroad; and it was diſcovered
that he had not only collected all the debts,
previous to his departure, but had alſo stripped
the houſe of every thing valuable, ſo
[Page 072]
that when the creditors brought in their accounts,
there was not ſufficient property to
pay five ſhillings in the pound. Every
thing was immediately ſeized, and the hapless
Mrs. Lacour would have been obliged
to the pariſh for a decent funeral, had not
her ſiſter, tho' but in indifferent circumstances
and myſelf borne the expence between
us. When I had paid every neceſſary respect
to the memory of this unfortunate woman,
I began to think of my own affairs.
You may remember my mentioning a Mrs.
Moreton, from whom I had recieved many
civilities. She lived at a ſmall village a few
miles out of town. To her I applied for advice,
in my preſent embarraſſing ſituation.
She received me with politeneſs, told me
ſhe would exert herſelf to the utmoſt to
ſerve me and ſaid ſhe thought I might make
my buſineſs anſwer very well in Kenſington,
where ſhe had many friends to whom ſhe
could recommend me. To a heart formed for
all the endearing and ſocial ties of life, how
every little kindneſs is received with gratitude,
and how does it feel the attentions
even of common civility. I feel myſelf growing
attached to this Mrs. Moreton, her manner
is the moſt prepoſeſſing, her form ellegant
and and ſhe poſeſſes the polite accomplishments
in an imminent degree. She is
the wife of an officer now in India, by whom
[Page 073]
ſhe has two lovely children, her manſion is
a little terreſtial paradiſe. Every thing about
it is neat, compact, and charming.
I have not as yet met with an apartment
to ſuit me, tho' I have ſeen ſeveral, however
it is determined I ſhall not have a ſhop but
carry on my buſineſs as a chamber milliner.
My heart almoſt ſinks at the idea of a
young, unprotected creature like myſelf,
venturing upon ſuch a plan, but what can
I do, convinced as I am of the impoſſibility
of ever doing any thing in the literary way,
I ſhall never more renew my attempts.
I muſt remember the laſt words of my
dear mother, “be humble, patient and industrious,
and rely on heaven for ſupport.”
Let me have your prayers, my beloved Celia.
But I need not aſk them, I am ſure my ſweet
benevolent friend looks round the whole
univerſe with an eye of heavenly complacency,
and wiſhes every boſom as tranquil as
her own; and that your happineſs may never
be diminiſhed, is the fervant prayer of
MERIEL.
[Page 074]
LETTER XXXI.
MERIEL to CELIA.
Auguſt 23 d , 1780.
I am now ſettled in a very neat apartment,
within about a half a mile of Mrs.
Moreton's houſe; the people with whom I
lodge appear obliging and friendly, and from
the ſpecimen I have already had, I think I
ſhall obtain a very genteel living, as I have
much more work than I can perform myſelf,
and am obliged to employ ſeveral young
women. My Sundays I always ſpend with
Mrs. Moreton, accompanying her to church
in the morning, ſhe dines ſo late, it is
impoſſible to go in the afternoon. She has
introduced me to the family of a Mr. Belger,
a man of great genius, and independent
fortune: Mrs. Belger is the moſt exquiſitely
beautiful woman I ever beheld; but ſhe has
no accompliſhments, nor can I think ſhe has
been even decently educated; indeed, I
[Page 075]
have heard it whiſpered that ſhe is not his
wife; however, ſhe goes by his name, does
the honours of his table, and has by him a
ſweet little girl, the very image of her beautiful
mother: this child has more firmly
knit the bonds that holds her faithful to
its father; but tho' every look, word and
action, ſpeaks the ardency and purity of her
attachment: he treats her with a cold reſpect,
which I am ſure muſt cut her to the ſoul:
he is civil, polite, but diſtant. In this family
I ſpend many agreeable hours; I think
Mr. Belger the moſt ſenſible man I ever
converſed with, indeed, the more I converſe
with him the more I am convinced of my
own ignorance; he kindly endeavours to
inſtruct me, directs my taſte in the choice of
authors, corrects my judgment, and takes
great pleaſure in improving me in both music
and drawing. To confeſs the truth, I
have but little time to ſpare for theſe persuits;
but I ſometimes ſteal a few hours
from reſt to perform my neceſſary employments,
that I may the next day have a little
time to attend to Mr. Belger's inſtructions.
We cannot quite agree about religious matters,
but I diſpute with him, nor have I any
doubt of making a convert of him; for at
preſent, my dear Celia, this agreeable man
either is or pretends to be an infidel; I rather
think it is the latter, for he ſaid the
[Page 076]
other evening he loved to hear my sentiments
delivered with ſuch charming enthusiasm,
tho' they were in direct oppoſition to
his own. I have had ſome doubt about the
propriety of continuing my intimacy in this
family, as Mrs. Belger is ſuppoſed to be only
his miſtreſs; but her whole conduct is
ſuch as may call a bluſh upon the cheek
of many an inſolent woman, who looking
with mercileſs diſdain on her poor fallen
ſiſters, ſmiles contemptouſly and thanks heaven
ſhe is virtuous. Mrs. Belger is a tender,
exemplary mother, a kind miſtreſs to
her ſervants, a good chriſtian, and a meek,
obedient, faithful, I had almoſt ſaid wife; but
the myſtic words have not paſſed that can
render her character reſpectable in every
eye: you will therefore ſay, my dear Celia,
ſhe is an improper companion for a girl whoſe
reputation has once been doubted, and cannot
be regained by aſſociating with a woman,
whoſe character is ſuſpicious: True, my dear
girl, but I feel myſelf ſo attached to the family
ſo grateful for the attentions ſhewn me, and
am ſo conſcious of my own ſolitary friendleſs
ſituation, that my heart deprived of every
affection, every fond hope on which it once
reſted, naturally clings to thoſe whoſe kindness
ſooths its anxieties to reſt.
[Page 077]
September 16 th .
I have been ſo frightened, my dear Celia,
that I believe it will be ſometime before I recover
myſelf; and I cannot but conſider it
a great mercy that I am alive and able to relate
the cauſe of my terror. In the apartment
adjoining the room where I ſleep, the
maid of the houſe ſleeps with two of the
younger children, for they have a large family.
About four o'clock this morning, I
was awoke by a ſenſe of ſuffocation, and
ſtarting up, perceived my chamber to be full
of ſmoak, I jumped out of bed and looking
round to fee that there was no appearance of
fire in the room, ventured to open one of
the windows a little way to diſperſe it. I
then opened the door, which led to the childrens
room, here the ſmoak was more thick,
and I found the ſmell of fire grow ſtronger;
but what were my ſenſations, on going into
their apartment to ſee a baſket of cloaths
which ſtood on a chair by the bedſide all on
fire, and the curtains of the bed which were
fortunately of woolen juſt beginning to burn.
I had not an inſtant for conſideration, Providence
directed me; for I am conſcious that
reaſon was for a few moments intirely suspended,
I ran back to my own bed; dragged
of a blanket and immediately threw it
over the burning baſket, at the ſame time
[Page 078]
pouring on it a large pan of water, which
ſtood in the room, and had been placed
there for the purpoſe of waſhing the children.
I then awoke the ſervant, and took
the dear little innocents out of the bed;
they had been ſo nearly ſuffocated it was
with difficulty I awoke them, and when
brought into the air blood guſhed from their
noſes: when I had a little recovered them
and laid them in my bed, I returned to the
other chamber, ſent the maid down for
more water, and having entirely extinguiſhed
every appearance of fire, began to have the
uſe of reflection: my own almoſt miraculous
eſcape from ſo horrible a death, the
ſafety of the children, nay, the preſervation
of the lives and property of the whole family,
impreſſed my mind with ſuch awful gratitude
towards the Power, who had in ſuch
unexpected danger inſpired and directed me,
that I threw myſelf on my knees and burſt
into tears of unfeigned thankfulneſs. Had
I not diſcovered it at the time I did, we muſt
all have inevitably periſhed; for the reſt of
the family lay in apartments built diſtinctly
from this part of the houſe: the apartments
I occupied were over the ſhop, and
this room really belonged to me, but as I
had no uſe for it I gave it up to the ſervant
and children. The maſter, miſtreſs, three
more children and two apprentices, ſlept on
[Page 079]
the ground floor behind the ſhop, ſo that
the whole front of the houſe might have
been in flames, before they would have discovered
it. I aſked the girl how ſhe imagined
the accident had happened; ſhe ſaid
ſhe often was obliged to ſit up very late for
her maſter, that ſhe had been up that night,
till near two o'clock, and being obliged to
work very hard in the day time, ſhe was
very ſleepy and weary; that ſhe imagines
ſhe muſt have left the candle burning on
the floor, and that it had caught ſome of the
linen that hung from the baſket. You may
eaſily ſuppoſe I was not inclined to go to
bed again, I therefore dreſſed myſelf, and
waited the riſing of the family. When I
heard Mrs. Newtram up, I took the two
young children in my hand and went down.
“You are up early, Miſs Howard,” ſaid
ſhe, “I hope the children have not been
making a noiſe to diſturb you.” “I was up
much earlier than you can imagine,” I replied,
“but believe me theſe little dears
have been very quiet and good, but I was
ſadly alarmed this morning at four o'clock.”
“Alarmed, my dear ma'am, at what?” “At
an accident which had like to prove fatal to
us all.” “Good God!” ſaid ſhe, “what
can have been the matter?” “Come, come,
my good Mrs. Newtram,” ſaid I, ſeeing her
turn pale, “there is no occaſion for terror
[Page 080]
now, the danger is paſt, you ſee your children
are ſafe, but we have been all on fire
up ſtairs to night.” “Merciful heaven!”
ſaid ſhe, “that careleſs Betty.” “Do not
blame the girl Mrs. Newtram, fatigued as
ſhe is in the day time, ſhe cannot be supposed
capable of ſitting up till two or three
o'clock in the morning, eſpecially when we
recollect ſhe in general riſes at ſix, to perform
her daily avocations; and I will juſt
beg leave to mention that it is my earneſt
wiſh ſhe may be forgiven: ſhe has ſuffered
enough already from her fright, do not,
therefore, reproach her, and I will be answerable
ſuch an accident never happens
again in any place where ſhe is.” I then
took Mrs. Newtram up ſtairs, and ſhewed
her the things that had been on fire. When
ſhe ſaw the imminent danger to which her
children had been expoſed, ſhe caught them
in her arms and with all the enthuſiaſm of
maternal affection, bleſt heaven for their
preſervation. “Oh! Miſs Howard,” ſaid
ſhe, “how can we ever be grateful enough
for your quick recollection in ſuch an alarming
ſituation; we are bound to conſider you
as our guardian angel.”
I ſtopped the good woman in the midſt of
her acknowledgments, to renew my entreties
for Betty's pardon, and that ſhe might
[Page 081]
be continued in her place. “I can deny
you nothing,” ſaid ſhe; “but I am afraid
Mr. Newtram will be inveterate againſt her.”
“That will be cruel indeed,” ſaid I, “for
he was himſelf undoubtedly the prior cauſe
of the accident, by keeping ſuch very late
hours.” She then went down ſtairs, and I
went to breakfaſt; which before I had half
finiſhed was interrupted by the entrance of
Mr. Newtram. He repeated every acknowledgment
before made by his wife, ſealed
Betty's pardon, and declared he wiſhed for
nothing more, than for ſome opportunity
to convince me of his gratitude, and that
he would almoſt lay down his life to ſerve
me. Thus you ſee, my dear Celia, this
accident will in the end terminate for my
good, as it ſeems to have ſecured the affection
and friendſhip of thoſe, in whoſe
houſe I reſide; and in caſe of future trouble
I make no doubt, but I ſhall find in theſe
worthy people, a kindneſs nearly maternal.
Farewell my friend; your's ever.
MERIEL.
[Page 082]
LETTER XXXII.
MERIEL to CELIA.
December 5 th , 1780.
MR. BELGER has frequently private
concerts at his houſe. I always am
one of the party. Sometimes I perform on
the piano forte; ſometimes ſing, and always
meet with ſuch applauſe, as almoſt
makes me vain; indeed the praiſes of
Mr. Belger only, are ſufficient for that purpose.
He is the only man I could ever
think perfectly agreeable, ſince the conduct
of Rainsforth gave me ſo very deſpicable
an opinion of the whole ſex. But of one
thing I am convinced; it is dangerous to
enter into arguments with perſons who
have an improper opinion of religious matters.
I have had frequent converſations
with Mr. Belger on this topic, and inſtead of
being able to convince him of his errors.
(You will tremble whem I tell you) I have
only imbibed his principles, and find doubt
ariſing in my mind concerning the moſt
[Page 083]
sacred parts of the holy writings. Oh! my
dear Celia, pray for your weak friend, that
ſhe may not be loſt by liſtening to this insinuating
man. I have indeed made frequent
reſolutions to avoid his company, and
as frequently broke them. I take my heart
ſeverely to taſk. Surely Celia, after it has
ſuffered ſo much from the perfidy of the
ſex, it cannot be ſo weak, nay ſo wicked, as
to feel an attachment for a man who is another's
right. Do not fear for me, my beloved
friend; if I cannot command my feelings,
I can my actions. Should I at ſome future
period diſcover that Rainsforth is not the
capricious character, he at preſent appears,
I will never have the mortification to reflect,
I have rendered myſelf unworthy of
his eſteem: if otherwiſe, it ſhall never be
in the power of any man to boaſt, that he
has triumphed over the virtue of Meriel
Howard. No Celia, I may be unfortunate,
but I never will be guilty.
Buſineſs does not anſwer ſo well as I expected.
Many, I believe, employed me at
firſt from motives of curioſity, and that
being gratified, they return to thoſe they
formerly dealt with; and I have now scarcely
enough to employ myſelf, and one young
woman, whom Mrs. Moreton has recommended
to me. However, I keep up my
[Page 084]
ſpirits as well as I can, and hope for better
times. My letters are few, you ſay lately.
Indeed I have nothing either new or interesting
to write about. When I have, you
ſhall hear from your
MERIEL.
LETTER XXXIII.
MERIEL to CELIA.
February 9 th , 1781.
What a world this is, my friend,
and of what a medly of ſtrange inconsistent
characters is it compoſed. Were
it not impious, I could wiſh I had never entered
it. Some few years ſince, I believed
every heart glowed with humanity, friendſhip
and ſincerity toward each other. Yes, Celia,
at the time I left the convent theſe were
[Page 085]
my ideas of the world. Nay it is but very
lately I began to perceive how erroneous my
opinion was; but believe me, the more we
know of mankind the leſs we find to admire
or eſteem. The heart grows hardened by
repeated diſappointments, and from having
an unbounded confidence in our fellow-creatures,
we begin to ſuſpect every one of hypocrisy.
My dear friend, I am ſtill the ſport of capricious
fortune. Deceived, betrayed by
thoſe I moſt loved and truſted, I have no
comfort left but my dependance on heaven,
(which thank God, I have regained) and the
conſcious integrity of my own heart.
Some little time after my laſt letter, Mrs.
Moreton called on me one morning, in her
way to town, and aſked if I would take a ride
with her. She was in Mr. Belger's carriage.
I had nothing to prevent me and immediately
complied. We proceeded to town,
and ſtopped at a ſilk mercer's. Mrs. Moreton
ordered ſome ſilks to be put up, but when
ſhe came to pay for them, diſcovered ſhe had
left her purſe behind her. I had money sufficient
about me, and therefore offered to pay
the amount of the bill. “Do ſo, my dear,”
ſaid ſhe, “it will be all the ſame. I can pay
you again when we get home.” It came to
[Page 086]
upwards of ten pounds, as ſhe purchaſed a
piece of ſilk for a lady whom ſhe expected out
of the country. When we returned the expected
lady was arrived. She approved the
ſilk, and after dinner took a walk to my apartments,
where ſhe ordered ſome very elegant
linen to be made: the lace ſhe choſe it to be
trimed with, was two guineas per yard. You
can get this done by Saturday afternoon,
ſaid Mrs. Moreton, for we are obliged to pay
a viſit to very particular people, and this lady
would wiſh to have it to wear. As ſoon as they
were gone, I wrote to a laceman in town, to
ſend me more of the lace; for the handkerchief,
apron, and ruffles were all to be full
trimed. As I had dealt with him before, he
did not heſitate. The muſlin I had by me;
and on Saturday afternoon, according to
their deſire, I took the whole ſuit home,
which, when finiſhed, came to near fifty
pounds. They were much pleaſed with it,
and deſired I would bring my bill on Monday
morning, about twelve o'clock. I had a ſmall
gold watch by my ſide, which was given me
by Mr. Welldon. It was of no great value,
but for the ſake of the doner, it was highly
prized by me. “Meriel, my love,” ſaid Mrs.
Moreton, “I have ſent my watch to be
cleaned; I ſhall be at a loſs to know how
time goes: do lend me your's for this evening.”
[Page 087]
“I ſet great ſtore by it, madam,” ſaid I,
“it was the gift of a deceaſed friend; but
I think you will be careful of it.” “As I
would of my own,” ſhe replied, as ſhe took it.
“Stay, madam,” ſaid I, “there is a little
trinket to it which I have vowed never to part
with.” (It was a ſmall locket which contained
a lock of my dear mother's hair).
She ſuffered me to take it off, and Mr. Belger's
coach coming to the door to attend the
ladies, they ſet me down at my own lodging,
and proceeded to town.
The next day, being Sunday, I dined at
Mr. Belger's, where I was ſurpriſed to hear
that the ladies had ſent home the carriage,
without returning themſelves, and that Mrs.
Moreton's children were in town with her.
However I felt no uneaſineſs or ſuſpicion,
and on Monday morning repaired to Mrs.
Moreton's with my bill: but to my utter
aſtoniſhment found the houſe entirely ſhut
up, and was informed by a neighbour, that
it was a ready furniſhed houſe, which ſhe
had occupied near a twelve-month, and that
ſhe had diſcharged her ſervant on Saturday
morning; that they had every reaſon to suppose
ſhe did not intend to come back again,
for ſhe had not paid the houſe rent, and was
beſides in debt to every body in the neighbourhood,
who would truſt her; and that
[Page 088]
on going into the houſe, which the landlord
had done early this morning, they found
nothing in it that had ever belonged to her;
but miſſed a conſiderable quantity of linen,
which had been lent her when ſhe took the
houſe.
I was now fatally convinced that my confidence
in Mrs. Moreton had been ill placed;
the linen I had made, the money I had
lent, had, altogether, greatly contributed to
reduce my finances, and I began to ſee the
difficulties, in which this ungenerous conduct
would involve me. At firſt, it ſtruck
me, that Mr. Belger had been acceſſary to
her departure; but in this I was deceived,
for on calling there, I found they were as
greatly ſurprized as I had been, and that
her ſpecious appearance had ſo far impoſed
on him, that he had lent her twenty guineas
only a few days before. Overwhelm'd with
this new affliction, I returned to my lodging;
but judge if you poſſibly can, of my
increaſed anguiſh, when, on entering my
bed-chamber, I ſaw my bureau had been
forced open, all my caſh gone, and with it
a quantity of edging to a large amount.
Almoſt ready to ſink with the terror that
ſeized my mind, I rang the bell violently,
and nobody immediately anſwering, I ran
down to Mrs. Newtram's apartments and
[Page 089]
enquired after Kitty. “Bleſs me, Miſs Howard,”
ſaid Mrs. Newtram, “did you not
diſcharge her before you went out this
morning.” “No, indeed I had not the
moſt diſtant thought of ſuch a thing.”
“Well, that's ſtrange now; for you had
not been out above five minutes, before ſhe
came down crying, and begged one of the
apprentices to go for a coach, ſaid you had
diſcharged her at a moment's warning, but
ſhe would go directly home to her mother.
When the coach came, we helped her in
with her boxes, and ſhe drove away, ordering
the man to ſtop at the White Horſe
Cellar, Piccadilly.”
“I'm undone,” ſaid I, “what will become
of me;” and ſunk almoſt fainting,
into a chair. Mrs. Newtram got me ſome
hartſhorn and water, after which I began
to ſhed tears, which in ſome meaſure relieved
me. “Dear Miſs,” cried Mrs. Newtram,
“what can have happened: have
you loſt any of your friends?” “Oh!”
ſaid I, “I have no friends; I am the moſt
unfortunate creature breathing, nor do I
know how to extricate myſelf from the
difficulties that ſurround me.”
[Page 090]
I then gave her an account of Mrs. Moreton's
departure, of the money, &c. I had
truſted her with, and concluded with the
diſcovery I had juſt made of Kitty's dishonesty.
“Why to be ſure Miſs Howard,” ſaid
ſhe, “it is a ſad loſs; but you ſhould have
been upon your guard againſt Mrs. Moreton;
you certainly knew ſhe was a woman
of dubious character; and to tell you the
truth, Mr. Newtram and I have often ſaid
it was a great pity, ſo ſweet a young lady
ſhould be ſo intimate, with a woman of that
kind: then there is Mrs. Belger, why all
the world knows ſhe is no better than ſhe
ſhould be; and you can't think what ill
natured things have been ſaid in the neighbourhood,
about your being ſo much with
them.”
“As to Mrs. Moreton,” ſaid I, “believe
me, I had not the leaſt idea, but that
ſhe was a woman of reſpectable character;
and tho' I have heard ſome things, not quite
ſo much to Mrs. Belger's advantage, I never
ſaw a woman in my life whoſe whole conduct
demanded more reſpect and eſteem.”
“Upon my word Miſs,” ſaid ſhe, “I am
ſurprized to hear you talk ſo, when you
know (drawing up her head) Mr. Belger
[Page 091]
is not her huſband; but that I have a very
good opinion of you, I ſhould think you was
as bad as ſhe.”
“I think, Mrs. Newtram,” ſaid I, “as
you ſeem to know Mrs. Moreton's character
ſo well it would have been but friendly to
have given me a little warning.”
“Why, la! Miſs, you know it was no
buſineſs of mine, and you told me yourſelf
you knew her before you came to ſettle
here: but, how do you mean to do? I suppose
you have ſome friends to whom you
can apply; if you have any letter, or any
thing to ſend to town one of our young
men ſhall take it.”
“I tell you again Mrs. Newtram, I have
not a friend in the world; I am a poor solitary
being, unconnected with the world, or
any one in it; and were I this moment to
leave it, not one tear of affection or regret
would be ſhed upon my grave.”
“Dear, now that's very odd, moſt people
have ſome friend or other, but I ſuppoſe
you have offended all your's.” “They are
dead,” ſaid I, “and unleſs you favour me
with your advice and aſſiſtance, I know not
to whom elſe to apply.” “To be ſoure, I'll
[Page 092]
give you the beſt advice in my power, but
had you not better apply to Mr. Belger?”
“Oh no, I would wiſh to hide my distress
from him in particular.” “You are
in debt? I ſuppoſe,” aſked Mrs. Newtram,
in a quick accent.
“Yes, I owe above forty guineas.”
“Well, and there is a quarter's rent of the
lodging due, that's eight more, then there's
the laundreſs and the baker.” “True,”
ſaid I, in an humble tone, “but I ſuppoſe
my furniture will ſell for as much as will
pay them.” “And is that all your dependance?
then I ſhall take care that we looſe
nothing: here, Newtram,” continued ſhe,
opening a door that looked into the ſhop,
“here, ſtep here:” when he came in, ſhe
told him my ſituation and concluded, “then
you know, as that is the caſe, we had better
take care of ourſelves, and be the firſt to
take the furniture.”
“That's true dame,” ſaid he, “ſo d'ye
ſee, Miſs, we'll ſend for a man to 'praiſe the
goods to-morrow.”
Aſtoniſhment almoſt ſuſpended my faculties:
“juſt heaven!” ſaid I, “is this
friendſhip?”
[Page 093]
“Friendſhip,” ſaid ſhe, tartly, “I have
a large family Miſs, and all my friendſhip
muſt be exerted for my children: if I was
inclined to give you the eight guineas you
owe me I cannot do it in juſtice to theſe
little innocents.”
Celia, ſhe pointed to the two children I
had ſaved from the fire: I fixed my eyes
on the unoffending infants, a freſh flood of
tears burſt from them, I folded my hands
upon my boſom and remained ſilent.
It was now one o'clock and the ſervant
brought in their dinner; they ſat down to
table, but did not aſk me to partake, I ſhould
not have noticed the impropriety of my remaining
in their apartment, had I not been
rouſed from my ſtupefaction by the youngest
girl, who getting from her ſeat brought
her plate of victuals and laid it in my lap,
and taking up a bit put it towards my mouth
crying, “there Miſſy eat ſome dinnee.” I
kiſſed the dear child, and apologizing for
my intruſion went up to my apartment;
where I vented my full heart, in an unrestrained
ſlood of tears.
Toward evening Betty came into my
room; ſhe ſaid her miſtreſs was gone out,
and ſhe had ſtolen up unknown to her maſter
[Page 094]
to ſee if ſhe could do any thing for me.
“You have had no dinner,” ſaid the kind
girl, “pray let me get you ſome tea.”
She then made up the fire, and preſently
provided this repaſt, which however disinclined,
I forced myſelf to take, to eaſe
poor Betty's anxiety. When ſhe had removed
the tea things and lighted a candle,
ſhe went down ſtairs again, and I ſat penſive
and ſolitary, retracing the paſt events of my
life. Alas! ſaid I, how very hard is my fate.
Poſſeſſed as I am of a heart moulded to compassion,
glowing with univerſal affection towards
my fellow creatures, I am conſtantly
thrown among people, whoſe every feeling
is abſorbed in ſelf. Yet ſure humanity
is the child of nature; it is a heavenly
ſpark of intellectual fire, implanted in our
ſouls by the hand divine. Every heart is
endowed with it more or leſs; but an intercourse
with the world contributes to blunt
thoſe keen ſenſations, till by degrees they are
entirely deadened, and we can look on a
ſcene of miſery without the leaſt emotion, if
it interferes not with our own intereſt or happiness.
Yet I cannot think that I ſhall ever
arrive at that happy ſtate of torpidity, for ſure,
while I can feel my own ſorrows, I ſhall never
be inſenſible to the woes of others; for never
yet did I ſee a perſon in affliction, but I made
their caſe my own, and my heart would
[Page 095]
instantly overflow with pity. But alas! no
heart melts with pity for me. Even Mrs.
Newtram ſeems to have forgot that ſhe has
daughters, or ſhe would ſurely compaſſionate
my ſufferings, by reflecting that thoſe darlings
of her heart may perhaps one day be in
the ſame ſituation. I was ſtill purſuing this
melancholy train of thought, when I was
ſtartled by a gentle tap at the door. I aroſe
and opened it, but was ſurpriſed to ſee Mr. Belger
enter the room. “Dear Miſs Howard,”
ſaid he, “forgive this liberty. I have been
informed of your diſtreſs by your officious
landlady, whom I have left chattering to
to Mrs. Belger, while I ſlipped away to offer
any aſſiſtance in my power to my charming
little friend.” I bowed my head, but could
not anſwer. I motioned towards a chair. He
ſeated himſelf and continued: “My dear
Meriel, I have long feared what is now realized;
I knew from the firſt moment I ſaw
you, that you were never deſigned for the
ſtation, in which you have lately moved. The
elegance of your manner, the delicacy of
your ſentiments convince me you are far superior
to thoſe women with whom it has been
your misfortune to be obliged to aſſociate.”
“Indeed, Mr. Belger,” ſaid I, “I am conscious
of that ſuperioty in nothing but misery.
I look round me with a deſponding eye,
[Page 096]
and think the world does not contain ſo
friendleſs, ſo wretched a creature as myſelf.”
“From my ſoul do I pity you,” ſaid he,
taking my hand, “and wiſh it was in my
power effectually to ſerve you without offering
any thing that might alarm your sensibility;
but that is impoſſible. I know of but
one method, by which you can be extricated
from your preſent difficulties.” “Alas, ſir,”
I replied, “I have not the leaſt hope of being
extreated. All my furniture will be
ſeized to-morrow, and I ſhall turned from
this habitation without knowing how to provide
another.”
“Not ſo, beloved girl,” ſaid he. “You
cannot think I will ſuffer it. Long have
I adored your merits. You muſt have
ſeen my ardent affection, which has ſo
often burſt thro' the thin veil, prudence
obliged me to throw over it; and if vanity
has not miſled me, I flatter myſelf I am not
altogether indifferent to you; if ſo, my
dear creature, what remains, but that we
this night bid adieu to all theſe vexations?
Let us defy the malignant cenſures of the
world, and happy in each other's affections,
riſe ſuperior to the narrow bounds impoſed
by prieſt-craft and ſuperſtition; dare to
think and act for ourſelves, and ſeek that
[Page 097]
felicity on the continent, which a concurrence
of untoward circumſtances prevents
our enjoying in England.”
Amazement had taken entire poſſeſſion
of me during this ſpeech; I was almoſt dedeprived
of the power of utterance. At
length I exclaimed “good God! how have
I deſerved this inſult? Ungenerous man,
have you forgot Mrs. Belger.”
“Dear Meriel,” ſaid he, “do not raiſe
imaginary obſtacles. You as well as all the
reſt of the world know I am not married to
that woman.”
“But you are bound to her, ſir, by every
tie of honour and gratitude.”
“Miſs Howard,” ſaid he, gravely, “can
you lay your hand upon your heart, and ſay
you do not regard me with a ſentiment more
lively than friendſhip.”
“If I know that heart, Mr. Belger, it
will never love whom it cannot eſteem.
And whatever may be its feeling I have
learnt to conquer.” I could not finiſh what
I intended to ſay, my tears flowed ſo faſt
they almoſt choaked me.
[Page 098]
“Deareſt, gentleſt girl,” ſaid he, “I ſee
the tenderneſs you vainly ſtrive to hide,
then come let us fly to France and inſure at
once both your own happineſs and mine.”
“What will become of your Emma,”
ſaid I, “Can you reſolve to forſake your
child?”
“Thank you, my ſweet girl, for the remembrance,
ſhe ſhall be the companion of
our flight.”
“And ſo drive her poor mother to distraction.
No, Mr. Belger, never ſhall it be
ſaid of Meriel Howard, that ſhe had by her
perfidy placed a dagger in the heart of an
innocent woman; nor ſhall you forget this
confiding, affectionate woman. Has ſhe not
ſacrificed every conſideration to you, friends,
reputation, all that can render life desireable.
If ſhe is not your wife, ſhe ought
to have been ſo long ſince. And tho' you
were dearer to me than the vital tide that
nouriſhes my heart, that heart ſhould break
rather than injure her. In the midſt of poverty
and diſtreſs, if I can preſerve my integrity
unſhaken, I ſhall ſtill have one comfort,
of which no earthly power can deprive
me.” Leave me Mr. Belger, I wiſh to be
alone.
[Page 099]
“Unkind girl to treat me thus, when it
was my intention to extricate you from theſe
impending difficulties and placed you in affluence.”
“You would have degraded me
to infamy, I thank your generoſity.”
“By heavens! Miſs Howard I will marry
you.” “No, Mr. Belger, that would be
only uſing the ſacred ceremony as a cloak
to perſidy and deceit. Leave me, ſir, my
reſolution is ſixed, and not the crueleſt
tortures poverty and its attendant evils can
inflict ſhall tempt me to alter it.” I then
broke from him, and going into an inner
apartment faſtened the door, and waited till
I was certain he had left the houſe.
Tho' I now found myſelf plunged in the
moſt miſerable ſituation, I felt a ſecret satisfaction
in reflecting I had acted with propriety
in regard to Mr. Belger, as reaſon plainly
pointed out how little hope there could be
of felicity with a man, who could, guided
merely by the caprice of paſſion, forſake a
woman ſo faithful, and ſo tender as Mrs.
Belger. Religion alſo told me, how little
I ſhould deſerve, ſhould I be ſo ſelfiſh as to
fix the baſis of my own proſperity, on the
miſery of a fellow creature, “Almighty
Father,” ſaid I, “aſſiſt me with thy grace
that I may be enabled to perſorm my duty
[Page 100]
in every ſtate of life, and allot me what trials
thy infinite wiſdom ſhall think proper.”
I breathed this ſhort prayer as I retired to
bed, a ſweet ſerenity came over my mind,
and I enjoyed a profound ſleep till near
eight the next morning. I will now conclude
this long letter; be aſſured you ſhall
not long wait for the ſequel of my melancholy
tale. Your's ever
MERIEL.
[Page 101]
LETTER XXXIV.
MERIEL to CELIA.
March 2 d , 1781.
I judge of my dear Celia's impatience,
by what I ſhould feel where ſhe in the situation
in which I was, when I concluded
my laſt: I will not trifle with you, but proceed
in my narrative. The next morning I
aroſe and went down ſtairs to Mr. Newtram,
told him I was ready to admit the perſons he
had mentioned into the apartment to value
the furniture, and hoped there would be
more than ſufficient to pay all I owed: I
was continuing to ſpeak to him, when turning
my head I ſaw the laceman enter the
ſhop. He pretended not to know my situation,
tho' I am certain he had been ſent for
by Newtram, and told me a long ſtory, to
which I paid but little attention, about having
a large ſum to make up, &c. I deſired
him to wait a little while, and I made no
[Page 102]
doubt but I ſhould have ſufficient to diſcharge
his bill. Alas! my Celia, I did not at that
time think of the vaſt difference between selling
and buying. I knew the little furniture
I poſſeſſed, together with what Mr. Welldon
had given me, had coſt more than ſixty
pounds and were at preſent nearly as good as
new. But when the man had looked them
over, and taken an inventory, he offered me
only thirty five guineas for the whole, in
which was included my piano forte. I urged
how much more they had coſt me, and how
little they had been uſed. He anſwered that
was nothing to him; he could afford to give
no more; there were ſome things would be
of no uſe to him; they would lay a dead ſtock
upon his hands, and if I did not chooſe to
take that, it was all very well, he had rather
leave them than have them.
What could I do? I found I muſt either
ſell them or go to priſon, and tho' I knew not
by what means to ſupport life, liberty had
ſtill ſome charms for me. I took the money,
and turning toward my creditors, for by this
time they were all aſſembled, laid the money
on the table, and deſired Mr. Newtram to
pay them all as far as it would go; but they
were not to be ſatisfied with this. “You
have good cloaths, Miſs Howard,” ſaid Newtram,
“you cannot expect poor people will
[Page 103]
ſet down quietly with their loſs, and ſuffer
you to go off with a trunk full of finery.”
“Alas! ſir,” ſaid I, “the cloaths you mention
are ſo few and compoſed of ſuch indifferent
materials, I did not think they would
be of any value but to the owner. There are
ſome few pices of edging, ſir,” continued I,
turning to the laceman, “which I muſt beg
of you to take again.” My trunks were now
brought down ſtairs. Mrs. Newtram choſe
out the beſt of my gowns, linen, &c. which
were ſet down at leſs than half their value:
the edgings were produced, when to my utter
aſtoniſhment, the laceman declared he
would not take them without an allowance
of one third of what I had paid him for them
only a few months before.
At length all demands were diſcharged,
my furniture taken away, and myſelf left solitary
in the empty rooms: I went down ſtairs
and delivered up the keys. I had done nothing
but weep all day, and had taken no
kind of nouriſhment ſince my breakfaſt, and
it was now four o'clock in the afternoon.
Mrs. Newtram did not aſk me to ſit down;
but when I left the parlour I felt myſelf ſo
ſick and faint that I was obliged to ſit down
on the foot of the ſtairs, where my feelings
became ſo poignant that I thought I ſhould
have been ſuffocated. Poor Betty came to
[Page 104]
me, and endeavoured to comfort me, but
her own ſobs were ſo audible as to prevent
my underſtanding what ſhe ſaid: In a few
moments Mrs. Newtram came out of the
parlour. “Dear me, Miſs Howard,” ſaid
ſhe, “you will make yourſelf quite ill with
fretting, and then, what is to become of
you; come, come, cheer up, all will be well
again, by and by; one of our young men
will call you a coach, you don't conſider
how ſoon it is dark this time of the year.”
“I don't want a coach,” ſaid I, “there is
nothing very heavy to carry; I will tye up
a few things in a handkerchief and leave the
reſt till I have ſome ſettled place of abode,
when I will ſend for them.” “But it's a wet
evening, child,” ſaid ſhe, “and a long
walk to town.” “No matter, I will not
have a coach.” “Perhaps, Miſs Howard,
you will be affronted, but if you cannot pay
for one, accept theſe five ſhillings.”
Celia, this vile oſtentation, this ſhew of
generoſity, after ſhe had ſtripped me of almost
every thing, awakened my reſentment.
“No, Mrs. Newtram,” ſaid I, “if I am
obliged to borrow money, I have a few more
cloaths left, on which I imagine I can raiſe
it; but at preſent I have a few ſhillings,
which is ſufficient for this evening, to-morrow
I will ſend for my cloaths.” She flung
[Page 105]
into the parlour, muttering ſomething about
ingratitude, pride and poverty. It was a cold
rainy evening, the latter end of October,
when with a ſmall bundle in my hand, and
a load of grief at my heart, I ſet forward on
foot from Kenſington; I had not proceeded
far before I heard a quick ſtep behind me,
and preſently was accoſted by Mr. Belger.
“Where are you going my dear creature,
this cold, wet night?” “I am going
to town, ſir, and am in haſte.” “Where
ſhall you lodge in town?” “Indeed, I do
not know.” “My dear Miſs Howard, you
are I fear more diſtreſſed than you are willing
to confeſs, believe me I am your friend,
conſide in me, I will not ſuffer you to want
any aſſiſtance in my power to give; but we
cannot conveniently conſult what is beſt to
be done, thus in the open ſtreet; ſtep into
this houſe, (we were juſt oppoſite an houſe
of entertainment,) I have ordered my carriage
here to take me up, and when we have
had a cup of tea we will proceed to town
together.”
“No, ſir,” ſaid I, “it is to no purpoſe
to ſolicit me, I am determined to go on to
town immediately.” “Than let me call a
coach, my dear girl, you muſt not be thus
expoſed to the inclemency of the weather.”
[Page 106]
“Mr. Belger, if you wiſh me to believe
you my friend, leave me, nor thus increaſe
my almoſt inſupportable load of anguiſh, by
making offers which I neither can nor will
accept.” “Then let me have the pleaſure
of ſupplying you with caſh till it is in your
power to repay me.” This too I obstinately
refuſed, and the rain juſt then increaſing,
he ceaſed his ſolicitations after ſaying I
ſhould always find a friend in him, he left
me to purſue my uncomfortable walk. It
was near ſeven o'clock, when I arrived in
town, with only a few ſhillings in my pocket
no friend to apply to and entirely at a loſs
how to diſpoſe of myſelf that night, as the
people in London are fearful of taking strangers
into their houſes, without a proper recommendation;
not having ſufficient resolution
to apply to any houſe for a lodging I
kept walking on till I came to the ſtrand,
where, juſt as I was paſſing a large haberdasher's
ſhop, a carriage overturned, the horſes
took fright, and I ran with many others into
the ſhop, for ſafety; I had not been there
above five minutes, before I heard a female
voice exclaim, good God! can it be? yes, I
am certain it is Miſs Howard; the lady had
now come cloſe up to me, and on raiſing my
eyes, I beheld Amelia Sidney a young lady
whom I had once or twice ſeen at my aunts.
[Page 107]
Shall I confeſs, that ſhame at being ſeen
in ſo draggled a condition was the firſt sensation
I felt, however, Amelia ſoon made
me forget that, when kindly taking my
hand in the ſoft voice of affection, ſhe ſaid,
“my dear Miſs Howard, where have you
hid yourſelf all this time;” then obſerving
my wet cloak and bonnet, ſhe continued:
“You have been walking in the rain my
love, I have a coach waiting, give me leave
to ſet you down wherever you wiſh to go.”
The ſoothing voice of tenderneſs as ſoon
wrings tears from the afflicted heart, as
does the churliſh voice of chiding, but then
the one drops gently, while the ſofteſt sensations
pervade the ſoul, the other is the
ſource of ſuch real anguiſh, that memory
will retain the pain they occaſion for years
afterwards.
I could not anſwer the kind miſs Sidney,
but followed her in ſilence to the coach,
when we were ſeated ſhe again renewed her
queſtion, “where will you be ſet down?”
The anguiſh of my heart now burſt out,
and I cried, I have no home: all places
are alike to me, “then you ſhall go home
with me,” ſaid Amelia. “Oh Miſs Sidney,”
ſaid I, “do not think by thus accpting
your kind offer of ſtepping into the
coach I mean to throw myſelf on your
[Page 108]
benevolence, my only motive was to have an
opportunity of enquiring whether you could
recommend me to any place, where I might
lodge for a little time, till I could conſider
how to diſpoſe of myſelf in future. Favour
me with your advice, dear lady, for indeed
I have no friends in the world, who intereſts
themſelves the leaſt in my welfare.” She
preſſed my hand and after ſoftly ſaying, “be
comfored, my dear,” remained ſilent, till
the coach ſtopped, ſhe then aſſiſted me to
alight, and leading me up ſtairs left me a
few moments in the drawing room; but
ſoon returned with her mother. Mrs. Sidney
received me with the chearful ſmile of an
old friend, and Amelia brought a change of
cloaths which ſhe inſiſted on my putting on.
Supper ſoon came in. The manner which
Mrs. Sidney and her daughter obſerved
towards me, was delicate and attentive in the
extreme. Not a word ſcaped them that
had the leaſt appearance of curioſity; they
ſeemed to treat me as tho' I had been paying
an expected viſit, and to conſider my company
as an obligation; when the cloath was
removed, I told my amiable hoſteſs, I thought
it but right ſhe ſhould know by what means
I became reduced to ſo diſtreſt a condition,
but Amelia ſtopped me. “Dear Miſs
Howard,” ſaid ſhe, “if it is in our power
to ſerve you, do not heſitate to point out
[Page 109]
the way, and you will not find us backward
in performing it; but I inſiſt that you do
not enter into explanations which may be
painful to you. You have no doubt been
unfortunate, as ſuch and knowing the excellence
of your heart, you have a claim
upon my friendſhip, I am ready to prove
myſelf your ſincere well wiſher, but I have
no right to enter into a minute inveſtigation
of your paſt conduct.” “But, my dear
lady,” ſaid I, “it is abſolutely neceſſary,
you ſhould be acquainted with many paſt incidents
of my life, that you may better concieve
my preſent ſituation and be enabled to
favour me with your advice, for my future
conduct. “Well, my dear,” ſaid Mrs. Sidney,
“whatever you think proper,” “I
thank heaven madam,” ſaid I, “tho' I ſhall
ſhall acquaint you with many errors, ſome of
which I tremble but to think on, (for at that
moment, Celia, I remembered my impious
deſpondency, and the divine interpoſition of
providence which delivered me at the very
moment, when to avoid temporal miſery I
was ruſhing into guilt.) Yet I have done
nothing to make me aſhamed, and tho' my
reputation has been ſullied. “We have all
our errors, Miſs Howard,” ſaid Amelia,
“and we all hope to have thoſe errors
forgiven, then ſhould we not be always ready
to forgive the errors of our fellow
[Page 110]
creatures. Come my dear girl let me perſuade
you to drop the ſubject, whatever have been
your errors I am ſure you now renounce
them, and whatever are your misfortunes we
will ſtrive to aleviate, if we cannot entirely
remove them.” “You are very good, Miſs
Sidney, but give me leave to proceed, I will
not detain you long.” I then in as few
words as poſſible compriſed the whole of my
ſufferings, not even endeavouring to veil my
errors, from the time of my father's imprisonment,
till the preſent day; ſhe liſtened
with attention, and taking my hand ſaid,
“Conviction ſits on your countenance, I
will not doubt your relation, my dear Meriel,
becauſe it has been delivered with ſuch ingenious
frankneſs that to hear is to believe;
but you have been ſtrangely miſrepreſented,
by thoſe whoſe duty it was to defend rather
than aſperſe your character.” She then informed
me that the Moſſops had propogated
the moſt malignant cenſures againſt me,
and from at firſt pointing me out as an object
of ridicule to entertain their friends, at
length repreſented me as fit only for their
contempt. In ſhort, folly, ignorance, hypocrisy,
and profligacy, had been ſet forward,
as the moſt ſtriking traits in my character,
and at the very moment when Amelia met
me, ſhe ſuppoſed me ſunk into infamy and
ſhame. “But,” ſaid ſhe, “I ſaw you was
[Page 111]
unhappy, and I know it is our duty not to
remember the faults, when an opportunity
offers, wherein we may be of ſervice to a
perſon in diſtreſs, I am now more than ever
convinced of the propriety of ſuch a mode
of conduct, for had I not acted thus, I
ſhould never have known how much Miſs
Howard had been injured, and how little
her unworthy friends deſerved ſuch a relative,
but I beg,” continued ſhe, “you will
conſider yourſelf at home. Believe me, you
are as welcome as a ſiſter, and whenever you
hear of a ſituation which you think will ſuit
you, my mother and I will give you every
neceſſary recommendation, but do not be in
a hurry to leave us, we ſhall not ſoon be tired
of your company.”
She then ſhewed me to a neat bed-chamber
adjoining her own, and wiſhing me a good
nights repoſse, left me. And who is this benevolent
girl? methinks I hear you ſay. She is,
my dear Celia, the daughter of a man, who
by induſtry in a reſpectable line of buſineſs,
brought up a numerous family in a reputable
manner. He lived to ſee his ſons well ſettled
in the world, and had ſaved enough to leave
at his death, Mrs. Sidney and this, his only
daughter a comfortable independence. Amelia
had a genteel, but yet uſeful education,
ſhe was equally qualified to ſhine in public or
[Page 112]
private life, ſhe preferred the latter. Her
mother's happineſs conſtituted her own, ſhe
read to her, worked with her, confidered
her peace as the main ſpring for all her actions,
and loved her with a tender reſpect
bordering on devotion. Yet with a pleaſing
graceful peron,
a lively diſpoſition, and a
large ſhare of good ſenſe, has this amiable
girl reached her twety-fifth year, without one
offer of marriage, ſhe has had many lovers,
but ſhe declares they all deſerted their
colours, when they underſtood, ſhe would
have no fortune till the death of her mother.
“So you ſee, my dear,” ſaid ſhe, one day
ſmiling “I am deſtined to wear the willow
as long as I live.” More ſhame for the male
world if ſhe is, Celia, for I think I could
venture to pronounce him a happy man, who
ſhould be ſo fortunate as to obtain ſuch a wife.
I have been in this kind family, now near
a month, but have not as yet heard of any
thing, that I think will ſuit, tho' I am determined
to take almoſt any ſituation rather
than remain a burthen upon the benevolence
of Amelia and her mother; who, tho' they
have ſufficient for all the comforts and ſome
of the elegancies of life, I am ſure, cannot
aſſord to have me conſtantly with them. I
ſent for the reſt of my cloaths the day after
I left Kenſington, but received no meſſage
[Page 113]
from thence, nor have I heard a ſyllable of
Mr. Belger, I hope you will grant me the
credit of not wiſhing it. I even gave the person
who went for my things a ſtrict charge,
not to mention in what part of the town I
reſided.
March 3 d .
A lady called this evening at Mrs. Sidney's,
who ſaid ſhe had heard of a place
which ſhe thought would ſuit me: it is to be
companion to an elderly lady in the country,
to read to her, walk with her help entertain
her company and attend a little to the domestic
concerns of the family. The ſalary,
I find, is but ſmall, that ſhall be no objection,
I never was extravagant in dreſs, and I think
I ſhall hardly begin now. I am to go to-morrow
morning at ten o'clock to ſpeak to a
lady, who is a diſtant relation of Mrs. Rooksby,
and who has been deſired by her to look
out for the kind of perſon ſhe wants. I wiſh
I may be ſo lucky as to ſucceed in this application,
as I truſt I could render myſelf
agreeable to the old lady, and I would likewise
exert myſelf to be uſeful. The mail goes
to-morrow, before I ſhall have time to write
again, but my Celia, may depend on my
ſeizing the firſt opportunity, to let her know
my ſucceſs. Adieu, my beloved friend, tho'
I can never love you leſs, you muſt be
[Page 114]
henceforth content, to ſhare with the generous
truely benevolent Amelia the affections of
your
MERIEL.
LETTER XXXV.
MERIEL to CELIA.
March 12 th , 1781.
Celia , my beloved Celia, when is my
heart to be at reſt, when ſhall I ſay,
“peace dwells in my boſom, its anxieties are
huſhed, doubt, fear, and incertitude, are no
more.” Alas! I fear Meriel will never feel
that heavenly ſatisfaction, 'till ſhuddering on
the verge of eternity, ſhe fixes her hope on
the verge of eternity, ſhe ſixes her hope on
things immortal, immutable and unchangeable.
But forgive me my friend, when I took
[Page 115]
up my pen, I meant not to complain, indeed
I did not, I am fully ſenſible if my bleſſings
were meaſured only according to my demerits,
I ſhould be poor indeed, but our
heavenly father, portions out our comforts
according to the meaſure of his love. Alas!
if our deſerts were only conſidered, who
would dare abide the deciſion; friendſhip is
his choiceſt beſt gift, and have I not found
that pure and un-alloyed in the breaſts of
Celia and Amleia. As to love;
                           It is an empty ſound,
The haughty fair one's jeſt
                           On earth unſeen or only found
To warm the turtles neſt.
Oh yes there is love on earth; ſincere,
tender, affectionate, faithful, ardent hearts,
but they were not formed for me, Celia; and
I muſt learn ſubmiſſion without repining, you
wonder what all this means, I cannot tell you
juſt now; when I am more compoſed I will
reſume my pen. How ſtrange does it appear
that I ſhould be an object of malice or envy
to others, who never harboured a wiſh to the
prejudice, or envied the good fortune of any
one.
The morning after I ſent off my laſt, my
dear Celia, I dreſſed myſelf neat but very
[Page 116]
plain, and at ten o'clock found myſelf at the
door of Mr. Kingly, in Golden ſquare, the
ſervant, who opened it, told me his lady was
not come down: he begged I would wait
in a parlour, where there was a fire, and
brought me a newſpaper to amuſe me. In
about twenty minutes, he returned and defired
me to walk up ſtairs. I followed him
into a back drawing room, where an elegant
woman ſat preparing to make tea, and a
nurſe was in the room with a very young
child. The lady aroſe and received me with
every mark of politeneſs; but I was ſcarcely
ſeated before a voice ſtruck my ears, which
vibrated to my throbbing heart, I felt my face
glow, but had not a moment for thought,
before the door opened, and Rainsforth entered
the room holding a boy about twelve
months old in his arms. Surpriſe threw me
entirely off my guard, I gave a ſudden ſhriek
and fainted.
What paſſed during my indiſpoſition I
cannot tell, but when I recovered, I found
the lady ſitting beſide me on the ſopha,
applying volatiles to my noſe and temples,
while a maid ſervant ſtood by with water,
but neither Rainsforth or the children were
in the room. “Are you ſubject to theſe
ill turns, my dear miſs?” ſaid the lady. “No
madam,” ſaid I, “but ſudden ſurpriſe will
[Page 117]
ſometimes ſerve me thus.” “Do you know
Mr. Kingly? Was it his preſence that
cauſed ſuch violent emotions?” “Only that
you call him Kingly, madam, I ſhould ſay the
gentleman who came in juſt now was a Mr.
Rainsforth, of Plymouth.” “Is your name
Howard?” ſaid the lady viſibly agitated.
I anſwered in the affirmative. “Then,” ſaid
ſhe, “I can account for the exclamation
with which he left the room. You are right
in your conjectures Miſs Howard, Rainsforth
and Kingly are one and the ſame person.
He took my name on our union, of
which I ſuppoſe you were unacquainted. “I
was indeed, a ſtranger to it, madam, or I
ſhould not have preſumed to have intruded
here; pardon the involuntary confuſion I
have occaſioned, and permit me to retire.”
“You are not as yet ſufficiently recovered,”
ſaid ſhe, “to venture out. Pray, ſtop, and
compoſe yourſelf, and if it will not occaſion
a return of your diſorder, we will ſend for
Mr. Kingly to take his breakfaſt.” I was
beginning to apologize for the diſagreeable
interruption I had given, but ſhe ſtopped me.
“I ſhall not liſten to a ſyllable of excuſe. I
am ſure it was unintentional, but I will not
forgive it on any other terms than its never
being mentioned in future.”
[Page 118]
Kingly, as I muſt henceforth call him,
was now ſummoned to breakfaſt, I endeavoured
to command my countenance; but
I fear to little effect; I attempted to riſe,
when he entered the room, but my limbs refused
their office. He bowed and took his
ſeat in ſilence, a cup of tea was handed
him: his hand trembled ſo he could not
raiſe it to his mouth. I did not dare lift
my eyes, leaſt I ſhould encounter his, I felt
my face alternately red and pale; and it
was with difficulty I could reſtrain my tears.
We were all ſilent for near five minutes.
Mrs. Kingly ſeemed the leaſt embarraſſed of
the three, and at length ventured to ſay,
“my dear Kingly you forget your politeneſs
to day, pray help Miſs Howard to ſome
muffin.” “I believe,” ſaid he, “it is by
ſome other name we muſt addreſs this lady
now.” Surpriſe at what he uttered tempted
me to raiſe my eyes with a kind of inquiſitive
look.” “My name is ſtill Howard,” ſaid
I, “nor have the leaſt intention of altering
it.” “Were you not on the point of being
married about two years ſince?” I was
more aſtoniſhed than ever at this queſtion.
I knew not what to anſwer: to have mentioned
any thing of my intended union with
Kingly before his wife, would perhaps have
only ſerved to make her unhappy. At length
I anſwered, I was, it is true, near being
[Page 119]
married about that time, but I had every reaſon
to ſuppoſe you, as well as the reſt of my acquaintance,
knew the cauſe of the match
being broke off. I have never had a thought
ſince of altering my condition. “It is very
ſtrange,” ſaid he, and the converſation dropped.
I then began to recollect the reaſon
which had brought me to the houſe of a
man whom I wiſhed, of all others, moſt to
avoid, and turning to Mrs. Kingly made the
neceſſary enquiries concerning the place I
wanted to engage for. Having received answers
greatly to my ſatisfaction, I aroſe to
take my leave, referring her to Mrs. Sidney
for my character. “I dare ſay there will be
no neceſſity to make thoſe enquiries,” ſaid
ſhe, “but if you will mention any day when
you will favour me with your company to
dinner, I will introduce you to my aunt, who
is fortunately now in town.”
I told her if ſhe would favour me ſo far, as
to give me a line to Mrs. Rookſby, I would
wait on that lady at any time ſhe would pleaſe
to appoint, but muſt beg leave to decline the
propoſed honour of dining with her, as I
feared it would not be poſſible to diſengage
myſelf from the kind friends with whom I at
preſent reſided, till an abſolute ſettlement
obliged me to leave them. Indeed, my dear
Celia, I felt there would be a great
[Page 120]
impropriety in endeavouring to cultivate an intimacy
with Mrs. Kingly, for ſhould ſhe not have
been acquainted with the connection that
formerly ſubſiſted between her huſband and
myſelf, and ſhould by any means hereafter
hear of it, ſhe might naturally ſuppoſe I cultivated
her acquaintance, that I might the
more eaſily enjoy her huſband's ſociety; and
if, as I ſuſpect, ſhe already knows how near
we were being united by the tendereſt
ties, ſhe would certainly approve a conduct,
which would ſhew how much her happineſs
was preferred to my own gratification. I
will conſeſs I wiſhed for nothing more than
a converſation with Kingly, for I plainly perceived
ſome myſtery couched beneath the
few ſentences that paſſed, while we were at
breakfaſt: But this wiſh I was ſenſible would
be both improper and imprudent to ſeek to
gratify. Mrs. Kingly having therefore named
a day, when ſhe thought it would be convenient
for her aunt to ſee me, and mentioned
an hour when ſhe would call and take
me to her, I took my leave. I ſlightly regarded
Kingly's countenance, as I wiſhed
him good morning, and diſcovered in it
ſtrong traits of wonder and impatience.
When I teturned to Mrs. Sidney's, Amelia
diſcovered by my looks the agitation of my
mind. I thought it would be wrong to have
[Page 121]
any concealments from ſuch worthy friends,
I therefore briefly related all that concerned
Rainsforth, and my unfortunate rencounter
with him that morning. “Upon my word,
Meriel,” ſaid ſhe, “every word you utter
excites freſh wonder. I remember hearing
of the affair you mention, but it was always
ſpoken of in ſuch a ludicrous ſtrain, that I
have myſelf frequently joined in the laugh
againſt you, conſidering you as a poor, fond
girl, who fancied every man who but ſpoke
a civil word was in love with you, and returned
this imaginary paſſion with all the enthusiastic
ardor of romantic affection.” I
made Miſs Sidney no anſwer, but going to
my trunk, returned with all the letters which
had paſſed between Rainsforth and myſelf.
“This proof of your fortitude and magnanimity,”
ſaid ſhe, when ſhe had peruſed
them, “was only wanting to complete my
eſteem for your character; for, it is from
theſe letters only, that I have learnt in what
manner you diſpoſed of your fortune. Generous,
noble ſpirited girl, it is only for ſuch
hearts as yours to be tried in the ordeal of affliction;
but ſurely heaven has ſome future
reward in ſtore, that will amply compenſate
the ſufferings you are ordained to endure.”
“Oh! my dear Amelia,” ſaid I, “have
I not already an ample compenſation in your
[Page 122]
friendſhip and affection. Praiſes from your
lips are balm to my wounded heart: may I
never forfeit your eſteem.” “That I am
ſure you never will. I only bluſh to think
how long I remained a ſtranger to your merits;
but the real diamond is always enveloped
in a cruſt, thro' which it is only on
near inſpection, we can diſcover its intrinſic
value.” “Ah! flatterer,” ſaid I, ſmiling,
while the tear of grateful affection ſtole from
my eye. Oh! Celia, when I forget the
friendſhip of Amelia Sidney, the benefits received
from her hands, the miſery from
which ſhe ſnatched me, may I be forgot by
that Providence to whom we can only look
for ſupport. Bleſs her, all-bounteous heaven;
make her felicity as boundleſs as the
benevolence of her heart; let her comforts
be many, and her afflictions few: and when
this tranſitory ſcene is paſt, ſoft and gentle
be her paſſage to the grave. May ſhe
“Peaceful ſleep out the ſabbath of the
tomb,
“And wake to raptures in a life to come.”
Pope . And may you, my dear Celia, ſhare the
ſame envied fate. For me, I was born to
buſtle on a ſea of trouble; and ſo as the busfetting
waves do not deprive me of the
[Page 123]
ſupport held out by the heavenly cherub
Hope, I have ſtill a comfort remaining, that
will bear me up under all my troubles, and
lead me to a harbour of eternal reſt. Adieu,
my friend, I will continue my narrative in a
few days.
MERIEL.
LETTER XXXVI.
MERIEL to CELIA. Letter
March 14 th , 1781.
Knowing , my dear Celia's impatience
to be informed of what followed
my interview in Golden-Square, I ſhall proceed
without any preface.
After the converſation I mentioned in my
laſt, it ſtruck Amelia that Kingly would
[Page 124]
undoubtedly endeavour to ſee me, as his mind
muſt be in the ſame ſtate of painful uncertainty
in regard to my conduct, as I was,
when I reflected on his. I told her I would
by no means wiſh to ſee him, and requeſted
the ſervant might be permitted to deny me
in caſe any gentleman ſhould call. Our
meaſures were but juſt ſettled when a knock
at the door announced a viſitor, and by listning
at the top of the ſtair-caſe, I plainly
heard Kingly's voice. He ſeemed much disappointed
at not finding me at home, and
left word he would call at twelve o'clock the
next day: accordingly I wrote the following
note to be delivered when he came.
Enclosure TO MR. KINGLY.
MISS HOWARD's compliments to Mr.
Kingly; requeſts as a particular favour, he
will not give himſelf the trouble to call any
more, as Mr. Kingly cannot be ignorant,
that there are many forcible reaſons exiſting,
which renders it totally improper for Miſs H.
to recieve his viſits. She deſires no explanation
of paſt incidents; ſincerely wiſhes
Mr. K. every felicity; but is certain any
intercourſe between them, will not tend to
promote it. It is that reaſon only, which
urges Miſs H. to avoid an intimacy with
[Page 125]
the very amiable Mrs. Kingly, whoſe happiness,
ſhe devoutly prays may be permanent,
and of long duration.
Letter When he came, this note was delivered
to him by the ſervant. He aſked for pen
and ink, and left the following.
Enclosure
I AM convinced I have been decieved;
an explanation is abſolutely neceſſary to my
repoſe. I find you are the ſame charming,
delicate girl, I once adored; nay, which
even at this moment I find dearer to my
heart, than aught the world contains beſide.
Then, think not, I will ſit tamely down,
while you ſuppoſe me an unfeeling, capricious
monſter. There is one way, by which
I can clear myſelf; there is one, who can
plead my cauſe, and you not refuſe to liſten.
I reſpect that ſenſe of propriety, which urges
you to refuſe a perſonal interview; but I
muſt be reſtored to your eſteem, or be
wretched for ever. Your friend,
F. KINGLY.
Letter The next morning Mrs. Kingly called as
ſhe had appointed, and took me with her
in the chariot to Mrs. Rookſby. This old
[Page 126]
lady is extremely pleaſing in her manner.
Her perſon, tho' advanced in years, retains
many traces of grace and elegance. She
expreſſed her approbation of me, in the politest
terms, and ſaid, ſhe ſhould conſider
herſelf extremely fortunate in the acquiſition
of ſuch a companion. Her terms were
much more liberal than I had been led to
expect; and as we were ſoon agreed, ſhe
requeſted me to appoint an early day for my
removal to her houſe. “Buſineſs of a very
particular nature,” ſaid ſhe, “required my
preſence in London, which I have not visited
before for upwards of twenty years, nor
ſhall I now remain in it long; but while I
do ſtay, I ſhall wiſh to enter into a few of
its amuſements, and I am certain I ſhall receive
double ſatisfaction from them all, when
I am favoured with your company.” It was
then determined, that day week ſhould be
the time of my removal, and we took our
leave. When I was again in the carriage
with Mrs. Kingly, ſhe ſaid, “it gives me
great pleaſure to find my aunt is likely to
make ſo agreeable an addition to her family;
nor have I the leaſt doubt, but you will be
ſatisfied with your ſituation, as ſhe is a woman
of an eaſy, chearful diſpoſition. And
now my dear Miſs Howard, as we have settled
this important buſineſs, you muſt give
me leave to execute a commiſſion, I
[Page 127]
yesterday undertook. I have a letter for you,”
continued ſhe, ſmiling. “You may perhaps
gueſs from whom. Come, no drawing back,
I can aſſure you there will not be the leaſt
impropriety in your recieving it, and I flatter
myſelf I have intereſt ſufficient to obtain
an anſwer.” She then put the letter
into my hand. You may judge my confusion.
It was impoſſible to ſpeak, for I was
utterly at a loſs what to ſay. I believe, I
never looked more like a fool. Mrs. Kingly
ſaw my embarraſſment, and kindly, did not
ſeem to expect me to ſpeak, but began a
converſation on things quite foreign to the
ſubject. When we arrived at Mrs. Sidney's
door, ſhe refuſed to alight; but wiſhing me
a good day, ſaid, ſhe ſhould expect to hear
from me ſoon.
I ran up ſtairs to Amelia, and putting the
letter into her hand, cried, open it, read it
for me, for indeed I have not reſolution to
read it myſelf. Encloſed my dear Celia, is
a copy of the letter; alſo of one from Mrs.
Kingly, in which it was encloſed; when you
have peruſed them, I am ſure you will lament
with your poor friend, that ſuch merit
as Rainsforth's, (for ſtill I love that name,)
ſhould be ſevered from her, by the malice of
thoſe, who could really reap no advantage
from her diſappointment. Whatever were
[Page 128]
the motives, that inſtigated the Moſſops to
practice ſuch an impoſition on us both, they
are undoubtedly diſappointed; for from the
time of Rainsforth's marriage with Miſs
Kingly he carefully avoided all intercourſe
with the family; the reaſons for which you
will find in his letter. I think when you
have read, you will admire Mrs. Kingly as
much as you pity your
MERIEL.
[Page 129]
LETTER XXXVII.
MRS. KINGLY to MISS HOWARD.
March 9 th , 1781.
I feel , my dear Miſs Howard, that I am
under an indiſpenſible neceſſity of writing
to you, to requeſt you will attend to the
explanation ſo ardently deſired by Mr. Kingly;
and from which your rigid ſenſe of
propriety, urges you to recede: but in what
manner ſhall I addreſs you, dear, amiable
young lady, when I am ſenſible I have, tho'
unknowingly, ſtepped between you and happiness.
Often have I heard your name, oft
liſtened to your commendations, from lips
which never ſpoke, but they conveyed pleasure
to my heart.
My father's family lived in terms of the
greateſt intimacy with that of Mr. Rainsforth's;
Frederic and myſelf were nearly of
the ſame age, were frequently together, we
[Page 130]
learnt to dance at the ſame ſchool, and at
our annual ball I was always ſelected for his
partner. Our infantine attachment was noticed
by both our parents, and Frederic was
often ſmilingly called my little huſband. As
we increaſed in years, this attachment grew
weaker on the part of Frederic, but in my
boſom it gathered new ſtrength; the many
good qualities ſo conſpicuous in the boy,
became dignified virtues in the boſom of
the man. I always wept when duty called
him from his native place, and rejoiced unfeignedly
at his return. When my uncle
made me his heireſs, my parents began to
ſhew ſome diſapprobation of my viſible partiality;
and when I repeatedly refuſed the
moſt ſplendid offers, treated my paſſion with
a rigour, which ſerved only to make its impression
on my heart more indeliable. Juſt
before old Mr. Rainsforth met with the misfortune,
which was, I underſtand, the firſt
cauſe of your ſeparation from his ſon. I
loſt both my parents within a very ſhort period
of each other, and became my own mistress:
I know not how to proceed, I am at
a loſs for words, in which I can acknowledge
a weakneſs, which I fear you will condemn;
but anxious to reſtore peace to the
boſom of Rainsforth and proſperity to his
family; and perfectly unacquainted with his
engagements to the amiable Miſs Howard,
[Page 131]
I ſo far overſtepped the bounds preſcribed
our ſex, as to write to him making a tender
of myſelf and fortune: inſtead of writing an
anſwer to this letter, he came himſelf, thanked
me in the tendereſt manner for what he
termed my generous deſigns in his favour;
but declared his heart was under a prior
engagement. He then expiated largely on
the virtues of Miſs Howard, and declared,
tho' for the preſent, fortune had placed insuperable
barriers to obſtruct your union,
he ſhould ever hold himſelf as bound to you,
and while you remained ſingle, conſider
himſelf not at liberty to marry any other woman.
He requeſted that tho' unable to accept
the offered honour of my hand, he
might not be deprived of my friendſhip, and
declared he ſhould always think on me with
gratitude and affection.
From this time I ſedulouſly endeavoured
to conquer a paſſion, which I found preyed
upon my peace of mind, and when I heard
of the fortune left his family flattered myself
I had ſucceded: I ſincerely rejoiced in
the proſpect of his felicity in an union with
you, which he told me would now ſoon be
compleated: but one morning he came to
me in viſible agitation, and taking my hand,
cried, “dear Margaret, I am diſappointed in
my tendereſt hopes, Meriel Howard is
[Page 132]
married.” I tried to perſuade him he had been
miſinformed; but he ſaid there was no room
for doubt, as it had been confirmed by your
own hand. He now viſited me every day,
and I will confeſs to you, I exerted myſelf
to divert his melancholy; I in ſome meaſure
ſucceeded; and one day as we were chatting
together on indifferent ſubjects, he suddenly
caught my hand and cried, “if my
lovely friend would accept the offer of a heart
that was once devoted to another, happineſs
might yet be my portion; but I dare not
indulge ſo ſweet a hope.” I will not repeat
to you, Miſs Howard, the many conversations
we had on this ſubject; ſuffice it to ſay
we were ſoon united. From that happy
moment, his tenderneſs, his aſſiduity, has
every day increaſed: I ſaw his heart ſtill
beat true to its firſt attachment; but I alſo
ſaw his ſtruggles to ſuppreſs its emotions.
He never indulged himſelf in talking of you,
carefully avoiding every place where he
might chance to hear your name mentioned.
The violent agitation, which you was thrown
into by his entering the room the other morning,
and an exclamation which broke from
him, as he caught you, when you were falling
to the ground, made me readily conceive who
it was I had the honour to entertain. I felt for
you both, more than I can expreſs: I had long
been acquainted with your virtues, though a
[Page 133]
ſtranger to your perſon, and I wiſhed earnestly
for power to aleviate ſufferings, of
which I conſidered myſelf the cauſe.
I eaſily underſtood your generous motive
for declining viſiting at my houſe. I eſteem,
I venerate you for it, tho' I am certain no
ill conſequence could enſue from an intimacy
between two hearts ſo chaſte, ſo much under
the guidance of religion and honour, as
your's and Mr. Kingly's. The day after I
firſt had the pleaſure of ſeeing you, I perceived
Mr. Kingly to be melancholy and absent.
I preſſed to know the cauſe. He was
at firſt embarraſſed; at length he candidly
told me he wiſhed much for a converſation
with you, to clear up ſome myſteries which
at preſent tormented him beyond meaſure;
that he had called on you twice, but you absolutely
refuſed to ſee him. He then shewed
me your note, and aſked, if he were to
write a few lines, whether I would prevail
with you to read them, and grant him an answer.
I readily promiſed him to comply
with this requeſt, and I hope, my dear Miſs
Howard, you will by an anſwer, reſtore peace
to his boſom; for I am well convinced, he
will never be happy while he imagines you
[Page 134]
think him unworthy your regard. I am,
dear young lady, with every ſentiment of esteem,
and every kind wiſh for your happiness,
Your friend in ſincerity,
M. KINGLY.
LETTER XXXVIII.
MR. KINGLY to MISS HOWARD. Letter
March 9 th , 1781.
That you are ſtill unmarried, my dear
Meriel, is to me the cauſe of great astonishment;
that you are depreſſed in your
circumſtances, and obliged to ſeek by servitude
the neceſſary means to ſupport life,
gives the accuteſt pangs to a heart, that ever
wiſhed and would have rejoiced in your hap
[Page 135]
pineſs. I fear we have both been deceived;
but why that deceit has been practiſed againſt
us, I am at a loſs to think. I know you never
were a favourite with the Moſſop's.
They envied virtues they had not ſpirit to
imitate; but why they ſhould thus labour
to render two unoffending beings ſo completely
miſerable, is altogether unaccountable.
I have, my dear friend, (the bluſh of
ſhame crimſons my cheek while I write it)
but I have doubted your virtues. I have
thought you falſe, capricious, light and undeserving:
and much I fear, you have been
taught to think me the vileſt of my ſex. But
let me haſten to exculpate myſelf from ſo
black a charge. Let me trace back to the
time that even at this moment my ſoul shudders
to think upon. Let me lead your ideas
back to the letter [1] I wrote informing you of
the happy change in my father's fortune. I
was haſtily preparing to come to London,
from which place unavoidable buſineſs had
detained me much longer than my impatience
could well brook; when one morning
I met young Moſſop, who at that time belonged
to a ſhip lying at Plymouth. After
the uſual ſalutations, he aſked me if I had
that morning any letters from London. I
replied, I had been from home all the
[Page 136]
morning. You will, no doubt, on your return,
find letters, ſaid he; for I have juſt heard
from Heſter, who mentions having ſeen her
couſin, and that ſhe was employed in writing
to you. My heart ſunk, my dear Meriel,
at this intelligence; for, as in my letter I
had mentioned the time I ſhould leave Plymouth,
I did not expect an anſwer, and naturally
thought, it muſt have been something
particular had occaſioned your writing.
I left Moſſop and inſtantly returned home;
where I found a letter, the contents of which
had nearly fired my brain. It is indeliably
imprinted on my memory; it can never be
forgotten. Theſe were the words:
Enclosure
SIR,
THE receipt of your laſt favour, occasioned
a mixture of both pain and pleaſure in
my boſom. I was extremely happy to hear
of your increaſe of fortune; but pained to
find you ſtill retained your partiality for me.
Abſence, my good ſir, and a variety of incidents,
has entirely obliterated from my
heart, every trace, of what I once called
love. But I find I was deceived, in supposing
myſelf actuated by that paſſion. I ſhall
ever remember Mr. Rainsforth with the
moſt grateful eſteem; but my heart, and
[Page 137]
all its tendereſt affections, are devoted to
another object; to whom, to-morrow morning
I mean to plight my faith, in the moſt
ſolemn manner. I imagined a knowledge
of this event, would prevent your intended
journey to the metropolis. I ſhould be
greatly obliged, if you would ſeal up all my
letters and give them to my couſin Moſſop,
who will ſend them to town in a parcel to
his ſiſter. At the ſame time, pleaſe to inform
me whether you would wiſh yours to
be returned, or whether I have your permission
to conſign them to eternal oblivion.
I ſincerely wiſh you may meet with a woman,
more calculated to make you happy,
than was the woman, who now, for the laſt
time, ſigns herſelf,
MERIEL HOWARD.
Letter I cannot give you the leaſt idea of the
poignancy o my feelings, or the madneſs of
my actions, at this cruel, inſulting letter. I
was abſolutely frantic: my father endeavoured
to ſooth me. He had always expreſſed a
diſlike at my propoſed union with you, tho'
for what reaſon I never could learn. He
told me I ought to rejoice at having discovered
your light, changeable diſpoſition,
before it was in your power to injure my
honour. I liſtned to him with reverence;
[Page 138]
I knew he never yet had expreſſed a wiſh,
which did not ultimately tend to my good:
I endeavour to calm my tranſports, and
ſtrove to perſuade myſelf I ſhould ſoon hate
you. I wrote you a long letter, wherein I
gave vent to the anguiſh of my heart. I
then ſealed up all the dear pledges of your
affection, and which till that moment had
been preſerved as the choiceſt treaſures I
poſſeſſed, and went to ſeek Moſſop.
“You did not tell me,” ſaid I, “your
couſin Meriel was married.” “Dear Rainsforth,”
ſaid he, “I had not courage to inform
you of her perfidy, as I knew you loved
the unworthy girl.” “She has desired,”
ſaid I, “to have her letters returned;
here they are: you are to ſend them to your
ſiſter. Oh! Moſſop, I could not have believed
Meriel Howard”—“I am ſorry,”
ſaid he, interrupting me, “I had not before
warned you of her diſpoſition. She
always was of a fickle temper, I could have
told you of many inſtances of her levity of
heart, which ſhe ſo effectually hides under
an affectation of ſentiment and reſerve; but
you were ſo bigoted to her, you would not
have believed my aſſertions.” He then told
me, you were once attached to a married man,
one Pringle, whom he was intimate with in
London; that you eloped from your
[Page 139]
father's houſe, and it was to be feared you
had reaſon to repent your raſhneſs. “Consummate
hypocrite,” ſaid I. “But from
this moment I eraſe her from my heart; I
will never ſuffer myſelf to mention her name;
I will be happy, ſpite of her cruel arts to
undermine my peace.”
From that time I carefully avoided, even
the ſociety of Moſſop, leaſt I ſhould hear
your name, and be tempted to break my
reſolves; and in a very ſhort time I yeilded
to the entreaties of my friends, and gave my
hand to the lovely, amiable woman, whom
you have ſeen, and whom I am ſure you
love; for her ſoul is congenial with your
own. Meriel, I will not pretend to ſay I
had forgot you; but the engaging qualities
of my wife, the innocent beauties of my
children had in a great meaſure, filled that
void in my heart, which the loſs of you had
occaſioned. Indeed, I had began to fancy
myſelf happy, when your preſence and sudden
illneſs, the other morning, awakened
my long ſtifled tenderneſs, convinced me I
had been deceived, and that we both were
deſtined to be miſerable.
My wife, the beſt, the kindeſt of her ſex,
ſee's my ſufferings, and generouſly pitties
them. Ah! my dear friend, how are
[Page 140]
thosesufferings augmented, when I reflect that
the anguiſh which oppreſſes me, is conveyed
to her gentle boſom, and ſhe pines in ſecret
at the want of that ardent affection, which
would conſtitute the whole happineſs of her
life.
She has promiſed me, to deliver this to
your hands; matchleſs tenderneſs! let her
ſoft pleadings prevail my dear Miſs Howard;
write to me, if it is but one line, to ſay you
do not quite deſpiſe me. Tell me alſo,
whether you wrote that cruel letter; and if
you did, what were your reaſons for it.
But, ah! it is impoſſible, you are the ſame
charming, amiable woman, I once adored
beyond life, and whoſe image only the pang
that diſolves every tie of nature, can eraſe
from my heart.
Oh! Margret, thou much eſteemed woman,
pardon theſe involuutary wanderings
of my pen, I would die rather than injure
you: this once forgive my wayward heart,
and henceforth my every hour of life ſhall
be devoted to thee. Meriel, dear loſt Meriel,
if you wiſh to ſave me from diſtraction,
write one line of comfort to the wretched
F. KINGLY.
[Page 141]
MERIEL to CELIA, (in continuation.) Letter
CAN you concieve, my dear Celia, the
poignancy of my feelings when I had read
this horrid detail of the impoſition that had
been practiſed, thus to ruin the peace of
Kingly and myſelf. Heſter Moſſop was the
perſon, my ſuſpicions reſted on, yet why
ſhe ſhould endeavour to undermine my happiness,
when it would by no means conduce
either to her intereſt or felicity remains ſtill
an inexplicable riddle. I cannot tell you
how often I read the dear letter which undecieved
me, in regard to Kingly's conduct;
how often I preſſed it to my heart, and bathed
it in my tears: amiable youth, charming
engaging woman, cried I, as I alternately
read the letters of Frederic and his Margaret;
may your happineſs be as complete as
you are deſerving: never will Meriel abuſe
the confidence you have placed in her. My
reſolution in what manner to conduct myſelf
was ſoon formed. I determined to anſwer
Kingly's letter, and to commit it unſealed to
the care of his amiable wife; I laid my projected
plan before the friendly Amelia, and
finding it met her approbation, immediately
ſat down to put it in execution;
the following is a copy of my letter to Kingly.
[Page 142]
MISS HOWARD to MR. KINGLY.
SIR,
HAD not the letter I have juſt peruſed
been written in your hand, and delivered to
me by Mrs. Kingly, I ſhould be tempted to
think ſome whining ſchool boy had tried the
extent of his genius in its compoſition. In
the name of common ſenſe, my good friend,
to what do theſe piteous complaints tend, or
from whence do they proceed? are you not
the huſband of a woman, every way calculated
to make the connubial ſtate a ſtate of
bliſs? have you not two lovely children, the
pledges of her tendereſt affections; and has
not Providence bountifully ſhowered its favours
on you? have you not health, eaſe
and plenty? and yet ſimple mortal, that
you are, do you complain and ſigh, becauſe
you were not permitted to unite your fate
with one, who, if you knew her half ſo well
as I do, you would find entirely deſtitute of
many of thoſe amiable qualities which ſo
eminently diſtinguiſh Mrs. Kingly. For
ſhame Kingly, for ſhame, you almoſt tempt
me to laugh; your preſent conduct is like that
of a ſpoilt child, who having in his poſſeſſion
every valuable elegant toy his indulgent parents
can procure him, by chance diſcovers
[Page 143]
an inſignificant trifle, which at ſome paſt period
had amuſed his fancy; but being now
out of his reach, he raves, blubbers and roars,
throws from him with wild impetuoſity,
thoſe already in his poſſeſſion, and with the
right, wayward ſpirit of contradiction refuses
to be pacified. You are miſtaken in
ſuppoſing young Moſſop decieved you in regard
to my character; nature formed me
thoughtleſs, volatile and capricious: It is
true, while you remained with me, I restrained
my natural levity; but no ſooner were
you abſent than I relapſed into my former
folly, and innumerable are the giddy inconsistent
actions I have committed; among
which, no doubt you will reckon my writing
ſuch an unaccountable letter, merely to
try the ſtrength of your paſſion; to be ſure, I
did not think you would have reſented it ſo
highly; but when I found that my folly
was the means of promoting your intereſt,
I heartily rejoiced in your felicity, nor once
wiſhed to recall the tranſaction.
You are in another error in ſuppoſing me
unhappy. I am one of thoſe thoughtleſs,
inconſiderate beings, who ſeldom lay any
thing long to heart. My fortune is gone,
it is true; but, it was diſpoſed of in ſuch a
way, as I can never repent. My health and
ſpirits are ſtill unimpaired; then conſider,
[Page 144]
my good friend, how little I have to regret,
how much to be thankful for. It has ſtruck
me, ſince our interview in Golden-Square,
that you might, perhaps, imagine my illneſs
was occaſioned by your ſudden appearance.
Do not encourage that idea; it is a falſe one.
I am ſometimes ſubject to thoſe kind of fits;
and they generally ſeize me without a moment's
warning.
I flatter myſelf you will now be ſatisfied.
Be aſſured, there is nothing can give me
greater pleaſure, than to ſee you and the
lovely woman to whom your fate is united,
enjoy uninterrupted felicity; for volatile and
giddy as I am, I have yet a heart that exults
in the proſperity of every ſurrounding object.
Believe me, Kingly, true felicity is
placed within your reach, take the proffered
bleſſing, and enjoy it with gratitude, nor let
your own diſcontented fancies daſh with gall
the cup which Providence preſents, overflowing
with joy and peace. From the tenor
of your letter, I ſhould think you a hero
of romance, lamenting in pathetic ſtrains
the diſappointment of his firſt love. Pr'ythee,
my good friend, ſhake off the boy, aſſume
the man of ſenſe, and learn to eſtimate true
happineſs, not by the inconſiſtent wiſhes of
[Page 145]
your wayward heart, but by its own intrinſic
value. Adieu, and believe me your ſincere
well wiſher.
MERIEL HOWARD.
Letter I will not pretend to tell you, what pain it
coſt me, my dear Celia, to write a letter ſo
foreign to my feelings: to be obliged, as it
were, to accuſe myſelf of folly and inconsistency;
that would render me contemptible
in the eyes of the only man, to whom I wished
to appear amiable. But there was no
other way to reſtore his peace, there was no
other way to preſerve the happineſs of a woman,
who not only loved him with the moſt
enthuſiaſtic paſſion, but had placed an unbounded
confidence in me, and ſhewn a
friendſhip for me, which I ſhould have ceaſed
to deſerve, could I once have been ſo mean
as to envy her the poſſeſſion of the man, who
conſtituted the whole of her earthly felicity.
But tho' I wiſhed Kingly to remain in his
error, I could not bear to be thought meanly
of by this dear woman; I therefore took
an opportunity, when I thought it moſt likely
he would not be at home, and waited on
Mrs. Kingly. I gave her the letter, but at
the ſame time told her, tho' I wiſhed her
huſband to think my aſſertions true, I hoped
[Page 146]
ſhe would kindly believe I was not indeed
the very inconſiſtent character I had represented
myſelf, I then preſented to her a paper,
briefly containing every circumſtance
which had paſſed between Kingly and myself,
and encloſing the letter I had received,
as I imagined, from his father. She read
them with attention, and then declared it
was not old Mr. Rainsforth's writing; ſaid
ſhe knew his hand perfectly well, and alſo,
that he was a man incapable of writing ſo
inhuman a letter. “That there has been a
ſtrange deception practiſed, is very evident,
my dear madam,” ſaid I, “but I make no
doubt you will join me in thinking, it will be
much better to conceal it from Mr. Kingly,
as he would undoubtedly think as an officer
and as a man of honour, he was under a necessity
of reſenting the ungenerous conduct
of Mr. Moſſop.” “Dear, conſiderate girl,”
ſaid ſhe, taking my hand, “how do you contrive
to riſe every moment higher in my esteem.
It appears a degree of cruelty to suffer
Mr. Kingly to retain ſuch an erroneous
opinion of your conduct.” “But I muſt
inſiſt, my dear madam,” ſaid I, “on your
keeping my ſecret. Remember it was on the
promiſe of inviolable ſilence alone that I entrusted
you.” “But,” cried ſhe, tenderly,
“I fear you are unhappy.” “Indeed, I am
not,” I replied. “Since thoſe occurrences I
[Page 147]
have juſt related to you, I have had ſo many
trials, ſo many heavy afflictions, that I had
ſeldom thought on Mr. Rainsforth within
theſe laſt two years, except it was to rejoice,
that by not being united to me, he had escaped
a large ſhare of ſorrow, as he would
unavoidably have taken a part in all my afflictions.”
“Ah! deceiver,” ſaid ſhe, smiling,
“you cannot perſuade me, that the
heart once tenderly attached to ſuch a man
as Kingly, can ſo eaſily regain its tranquility.
“But you do not reflect, my dear madam,
that I thought him a falſe hearted
ſwain, and ſtrove with a laudable pride to banish
him from my remembrance.” “True,”
ſhe replied, “but you are now undeceived.”
“Well, but believe me, it was too late to
awaken the long ſtifled paſſion. My heart
is juſt in the ſituation it was before I ſaw him.
Nay, I really think it is eaſier; for I am now
convinced that he is not altogether unworthy
the happineſs that awaits him.” I then
purpoſely changed the converſation, enquired
when ſhe had ſeen her aunt, and how long
that lady thought of remaining in town.
“I long to go into the country,” ſaid I,
“for there never was a woman ſo passionately
fond of ſtill life as I am; I doat on a
gloomy grotto; and a moonlight night,
with a nightingale under my window, and a
ſtreamlet juſt near enough for its murmurs
[Page 148]
to be agreeable, fills me with delight.”
“You are of a melancholy turn then,” ſaid
ſhe.
“By no means,” I replied, “I am the
chearfuleſt creature breathing when free
from noiſe and buſtle; but if you wiſh to ſee
me completely ſtupid, uſher me into a crowded
drawing-room, my faculties immediately
take their flight, and I appear what I am in
reality, a mere cypher to fill up the number
of the company.”
“I wiſh,” ſaid ſhe, “our houſe in Devonshire
was near my aunt's, I ſhould, I am very
certain, paſs many a happy hour in your
ſociety.”
“You are at a great diſtance from her
then?” “So far, that we ſeldom meet above
once in a year.” This information
pleaſed me, you may be ſure, my dear Celia,
for I wiſh not to be often in company with
Kingly. However, I did not expreſs my satisfaction,
and Mrs. Kingly continued. “Even
when I do viſit Mrs. Rookſby, I take an opportunity
when Mr. Kingly is from home:
for he has ſuch an invincible averſion to her
ſon, that he will never, if he can poſſibly
[Page 149]
avoid it, ſpend an hour in his company.”
“Does Mr. Rookſby live with his mother?”
ſaid I.
“Not in general, but in the ſummer ſeaſon
he frequently makes her a viſit of ſome
months continuance, eſpecially if his finances
run ſhort. Clement,” continued ſhe, “is
not a bad hearted lad, but he is thoughtleſs
and extravagant; and what offends Mr.
Kingly ſo highly is, he has an intrigue with
a woman ſuppoſed to be married. Her influence
over him is aſtoniſhing, and her extravagance
knows no bounds; the connection,
I believe, has been of long duration;
but he has not publicly avowed it till within
theſe two months. Buſineſs for his mother
took him to the continent, and when he returned
ſhe accompanied him.” “It is a
great pity,” ſaid I. But at that moment
hearing Kingly's voice in the hall, I aroſe to
take my leave; and as he entered the room
I left it.
To-morrow, my dear Celia, I take leave
of the amiable, friendly Amelia, and her
worthy mother, and enter into Mrs. Rooksby's
family. I am happy to find her ſon is
not much at home, as I have met with ſo
many vexations from the unmeaning assiduities
of the men, that I wiſh to avoid as much
[Page 150]
as poſſible all intercourſe with the ſex: for
except Kingly, I can hardly believe there is a
good one in the world. There was another,
Celia, but he is now no more. Dear ſhade
of the benevolent, diſintereſted Welldon, if
from thy bliſsful abode thou couldſt, now
look down, and behold the heart thy virtue
ſnatched from ruin, thou wouldſt ſee it overflowing
with ſuch grateful remembrance,
ſuch veneration and affection, as nothing but
the hand of death can extinguiſh. Adieu!
my dear Celia, I will write again when I can
tell you how I like my ſituation.
MERIEL.
Footnotes
[1] See Vol, I. p. 152.
[Page 151]
LETTER XXXIX.
MERIEL to CELIA.
April 20th, 1781.
I have now been in this family nearly a
month, and feel myſelf as happy as you
can imagine, by contraſting my preſent with
my late friendleſs and deſolate condition.
Mrs. Rookſby has ſeen a good deal of company
ſince I have been with her, and goes
frequently into public. I find, my dear Celia,
that ſenſibility is not always an object of
ridicule; for Mrs. Rookſby and Mrs. Kingly
can ſhed tears at a tragedy without endeavouring
to conceal, or bluſh for their weakness.
I have received ſeveral very genteel
preſents from the laſt mentioned lady, and
whenever her aunt ſpends a day with her in
Golden-Square, I take that opportunity to
viſit Miſs Sidney, and ſo avoid a meeting
which I am ſenſible cannot be very deſirable
to any of the parties.
[Page 152]
I have not as yet ſeen Mr. Rookſby, but
this evening his mother has a rout previous
to her leaving town, and ſhe informs me he
will certainly be their. The good old lady
pathetically laments her ſons unfortunate
attachment, ſays, ſhe is certain, from good
information, that he is the dupe of an artful
deſigning woman. “She has caught him
in her deep laid ſnare,” ſaid ſhe, “and he
holds himſelf bound to her by gratitude and
honour; for I am convinced real affection
had little or no ſhare in firſt forming the
connection. He firſt became acquainted
with her at Oxford, where ſhe paſſed for the
wife of an old counſellor. Her form, I am
told, is very lovely, and it could not be supposed
that a lad of nineteen, ſhould repulſe,
or fly the advances of a beautiful accomplished
woman. When he came to town ſhe left
her huſband and two lovely children, and
followed him, when a lodging was taking
for her a few miles from London. When
he went to the continent ſhe met him at
Dover, and inſiſted on going with him, and
during their journey, the infatuated boy
conſented to her returning and living publicly
with him in a houſe he has taken for
the purpoſe.”
[Page 153]
“He has been acquainted with her ſome
years, then,” ſaid I. “It is above three
years,” ſhe replied, “ſince he firſt ſaw her.”
It is really a ſad thing, my dear Celia,
that an abandoned woman ſhould prey upon
the fortune and deſtroy the peace of this
young man: yet if the tears and intreaties
of a fond mother cannot break the fatal
charm that holds him, ſure every other effort
will be ineffectual. But now my friend,
I muſt throw aſide my pen, and be fine lady
enough to declare it is for the purpoſe of
dreſſing, I begin to wiſh we were in the
country, I am already ſick of parade, ſhew
and farce; for really a faſhionable life is
nothing better. How tireſome to be plagued
with the civil howdye's of fifty women,
who are immenſely happy to hear you are
well, and would ſay, with the ſame ſang froid,
they were immenſely ſorry if they were told
you were dead. Oh what a miſerable figure
I ſhould make in the beau monde .
21 ſt .
Really this Mr. Rookſby is a very tolerable
being, and if I did not begin to fear he
may be the cauſe of future vexation to me
I ſhould like to paſs an hour or two in his
company, now and then well enough. This
morning at breakfaſt Mrs. Rookſby ſaid
[Page 154]
“how happy my dear Miſs Howard, ſhould I
be, if your charms and engaging qualities
were to draw Clement from his unhappy engagement;
I have indulged the moſt pleaſing
hopes from ſome expreſſions of admiration
and ſurpriſe, which broke from him on being
introduced to you laſt night.” “They
were merely words of courſe, madam,”
ſaid I, ſmiling, “when he knew I was
honoured with your approbation, he could
not be ſo wanting in politeneſs as to expreſs
any diſlike.” “But what will you ſay my
dear,” ſhe replied, “when I tell you he has
abſolutely engaged himſelf to dine with me
to day, a favour he has not vouchſafed above
twice ſince I came to town.” “We will
hope, madam, he is returning to a proper
ſenſe of his duty.”
“Ah! Meriel, I wiſh he may entertain
a proper ſenſe of your merit; how happy
ſhould I be in ſuch a daughter; how certain
would he be of happineſs, if bleſſed with
ſuch a wife.” “Dear madam, you over
power me; you over rate my merits, and
indeed I feel it is impoſſible I ſhould ever
love any man ſufficient to become his wife.”
“Come,” ſaid ſhe, “be candid, you cannot
forget Kingly.” “Indeed, madam, if I
know my own heart, it never yet harboured
an improper wiſh; I eſteem both Mr. and
[Page 155]
Mrs. Kingly, but I ſhould be extremely sorry
to ſee any misfortune diſſolve their union,
but let us drop the ſubject, I wiſh to remain
ſingle; let me only enjoy your friendſhip my
dear madam, and I ſhall be the happieſt
creature on earth.”
At dinner time Mr. Rookſby arrived. I
endeavoured to be unembarraſſed in my
manner, but after what had paſſed in the
morning it was impoſſible. He was attentively
polite; but I ſaw his dear mother
watch every look, and ſmile approbation,
whenever any thing eſcaped him that could
be conſtrued into tenderneſs. She preſſed
me to play and ſing: ſome little drawings
too, which ſhe has honoured by hanging in
the drawing-room, were ſubmitted to his
inſpection. “They are vaſtly well executed,”
ſaid he. “Clara draws very prettily.”
“I hope,” ſaid his mother, “you do not
make compariſons.” “Aſſuredly I do,” he
replied haſtily, “but every compariſon muſt
only convince me of Miſs Howard's evident
ſuperiority, not only in every virtue, but in
every accompliſhment.” I hope, my dear
Celia, this young man will not take it into
his head to fancy himſelf in love with me.
I never can like him; beſides, I am determined
never to marry. Adieu, my dear
[Page 156]
friend, I wiſh I was in the convent with you;
but it was not my fate to paſs a ſerene, unruffled
life, and I muſt be as patient as I can
till my hour of reſt arrives. Every your's,
MERIEL.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME .
Back matter
[Page ]
[Page ]
$$$
