W. M. Thackeray, Artist and Moralist
Author: Roscoe, William Caldwell.
Publication info: The National Review ; London (1856): II, IV, 502 p.

W. M. Thackeray, Artist and Moralist [in, The National Review. Vol. II. January and April 1856.]
[Page 177]
ART. VII.—W. M. THACKERAY, ARTIST AND MORALIST. The Newcomes . By the Author of “Vanity Fair,” &c.
Miscellanies, Prose and Verse . By W. M. Thackeray. Vols. I. and II. London, Bradbury and Evans. 1856.
We are not among those who believe that the “goad of contemporary criticism” has much influence either in “abating the pride” or stimulating the imagination of authors. The human system assimilates praise, and rejects censure, the latter sometimes very spasmodically. A writer or labourer of any sort rarely profits by criticism on his productions; here and there a very candid man may gather a hint; but for the most part criticism is only used by an author as a test of the good taste of his judge. It is a fiction, in fact, long religiously maintained in the forms of our reviews, that we write for the benefit of the reviewee. In most cases, and at any rate in that of a mature and established author, this didactic figment would be as well put aside. A new work, a body of writings, by a man who has attained a wide audience and
[Page 178]
produced a considerable impression on his times, constitutes a subject for investigation; we examine it as we do other matters of interest, we analyse, we dissect, we compare notes about it; we estimate its influences; and as man is the most interesting of all studies, we examine what light it throws on the producing mind, and endeavour to penetrate from the work to some insight into the special genius of the writer;—and all this for our own pleasure and profit, not because we think our remarks will prove beneficial to him who is the subject of them. Mr. Thackeray has outgrown even the big birch-rod of quarterly criticism. A long and industrious apprenticeship to the art of letters has been rewarded by a high place in his profession. He is reaping a deserved harvest of profit and fame; he can afford to smile at censure; and praise comes to him as a tribute rather than an offering. We propose, then, simply to say what we have found in the books we have read, and what light they appear to us to throw upon the genius of the author, more particularly in the two capacities we have indicated in the heading of this article.
As an Artist, he is probably the greatest painter of manners that ever lived. He has an unapproachable quickness, fineness, and width of observation on social habits and characteristics, a memory the most delicate, and a perfectly amazing power of vividly reproducing his experience. It is customary to compare him with Addison and Fielding. He has perhaps not quite such a fine stoke as the former; but the Spectator is thin and meagre compared with Vanity Fair . Fielding has breadth and vigour incomparably greater; but two of his main excellencies, richness of accessory life and variety of character, fly to the beam when weighed against the same qualities in Thackeray. Fielding takes pride to himself because, retaining the general professional identity, he can draw a distinction between two landladies. Thackeray could make a score stand out—distinct impersonations. It is startling to look at one of his novels, and see with how many people you have been brought into connection. Examine Pendennis . It would take a couple of pages merely to catalogue the dramatis personæ ; every novel brings us into contact with from fifty to a hundred new and perfectly distinct individuals.
When we speak of manners, we of course include men. Manners may be described without men; but it is lifeless, colourless work, unless they are illustrated by individual examples. Still, in painting of manners, as distinguished from painting of character, the men must always be more or less subsidiary to their clothing. Mr. Thackeray tells us of a room hung with “richly carved gilt frames (with pictures in them).” Such are the works of the social satirist and caricaturist. He puts in his figures as a nucleus for his framework. A man is used to elucidate
[Page 179]
and illustrate his social environment. This is less the case with Mr. Thackeray than with most artists of the same order. He might almost be said to be characterised among them by the greater use he makes of individual portraiture, as he certainly is by the fertility of his invention. Still, at bottom he is a painter of manners, not of individual men.
The social human heart, man in relation to his kind—that is his subject. His actors are distinct and individual,—truthfully, vigorously, felicitously drawn; masterpieces in their way; but the personal character of each is not the supreme object of interest with the author. It is only a contribution to a larger and more abstract subject of contemplation. Man is his study; but man the social animal, man considered with reference to the experiences, the aims, the affections, that find their field in his intercourse with his fellow-men: never man the individual soul. He never penetrates into the interior, secret, real life that every man leads in isolation from his fellows, that chamber of being open only upwards to heaven and downwards to hell. He is wise to abstain; he does well to hold the ground where his pre-eminence is unapproached,—to be true to his own genius. But this genius is of a lower order than the other. The faculty that deals with and represents the individual soul in its complete relations is higher than that which we have ascribed to Mr. Thackeray. There is a common confusion on this subject. We hear it advanced on the one side, that to penetrate to the hidden centre of character, and draw from thence,—which of course can only be done by imagination,—is higher than to work from the external details which can be gathered by experience and observation; and on the other hand, that it is much easier to have recourse to the imagination than to accumulate stores from a knowledge of actual life,—to draw on the fancy than to reproduce the living scene around us. The answer is not difficult. It is easier, no doubt, to produce faint vague images of character from the imagination than to sketch from the real external manifestations of life before our eyes; and easier to make such shadows pass current, just because they are shadows, and have not, like the others, the realities ready to confront them. But take a higher degree of power, and the scale turns. It is easier to be Ben Jonson, or even Goethe, than Shakespeare. In general we may say, that the less elementary the materials of his art-structure, the less imagination does the artist require, and of the less creative kind;—the architect less than the sculptor, the historian less than the poet, the novelist less than the dramatist. Reproducers of social life have generally rather a marshalling than a creative power. And in the plot and conduct of his story Mr. Thackeray does not exhibit more than a very
[Page 180]
high power of grouping his figures and arranging his incidents; but his best characters are certainly creations, living breathing beings, characteristic not only by certain traits, but by that atmosphere of individuality which only genius can impart. Their distinctive feature and their defect, as we have before stated, is this, that not one of them is complete; each is only so much of an individual as is embraced in a certain abstract whole. We never know any one of them completely, in the way we know ourselves, in the way we imagine others. We know just so much of them as we can gather by an intercourse in society. Mr. Thackeray does not penetrate further; he does not profess to show more. He says openly this is all he knows of them. He relates their behaviour, displays as much of the feelings and the character as the outward demeanour, the actions, the voice, can bear witness to, and no more. It is exactly as if you had met the people in actual life, mixed constantly with them, known them as we know our most intimate friends. Of course this is all we can know of a man; but not all we can imagine, not all the artist can, if he chooses, convey to us. We don't know our nearest friends; we are always dependent on our imagination. From the imperfect materials that observation and sympathy can furnish we construct a whole of our own, more or less conformable to the reality according to our opportunities of knowledge, and with more or less completeness and distinctness according to our imaginative faculty; and every man, of course, is something really different from that which every man around him conceives him to be. But without this imaginative conception we should not know one another at all, we should only have disconnected hints of contemporary existence.
It is perhaps the highest distinguishing prerogative of poetry or fiction, or whatever we choose as the most comprehensive name for that art which has language for its medium, that it gives the artist the power of delineating the actual interior life and individual character of a living soul. It is the only art that does so. The dramatist and the novelist have the power of imagining a complete character, and of presenting before you their conception of it; and the more complete this is, and the more unmistakably they can impress you with the idea of it in its fulness and in its most secret depths, the nearer they attain to the perfection of their art. Thackeray leaves the reader to his own imagination. He gives no clues to his character, as such; he is not leading to an image of his own. He probably has a very distinct, but no complete conception of them himself; he knows no more of them than he tells us. He is interested more in the external exhibitions of character and the feelings than in character itself; his aim is not to reproduce any single nature, but the image that
[Page 181]
the whole phenomenon of social life has left impressed on his mind. Of the tastes and temper that find their natural vent in this form of art he gives a picture in one of his books, which we have no doubt is lifelike.
“If he could not get a good dinner, he sate down to a bad one with entire contentment; if he could not procure the company of witty, or great, or beautiful persons, he put up with any society that came to hand; and was perfectly satisfied in a tavern parlour, or on board a Greenwich steam-boat, or in a jaunt to Hampstead with Mr. Finucane, his colleague at the Pall-Mall Gazette; or in a visit to the summer theatres across the river; or to the Royal Gardens of Vauxhall, where he was on terms of friendship with the great Simpson, and where he shook the principal comic singer or the lovely equestrian of the arena by the hand. And while he could watch the grimaces or the graces of those with a satiric humour that was not deprived of sympathy, he could look on with an eye of kindness at the lookers-on too; at the roystering youth bent upon enjoyment, and here taking it: at the honest parents, with their delighted children laughing and clapping their hands at the show: at the poor outcasts, whose laughter was less innocent, though perhaps louder, and who brought their shame and their youth here, to dance and be merry till the dawn at least; and to get bread and drown care. Of this sympathy with all conditions of men, Arthur often boasted: he was pleased to possess it: and said that he hoped thus to the last he should retain it. As another man has an ardour for art or music, or natural science, Mr. Pen said that anthropology was his favourite pursuit; and had his eyes always eagerly open to its infinite varieties and beauties: contemplating with an unfailing delight all specimens of it in all places to which he resorted, whether it was the coquetting of a wrinkled dowager in a ball room, or a highbred young beauty blushing in her prime there; whether it was a hulking guardsman coaxing a servant-girl in the Park—or innocent little Tommy that was feeding the ducks whilst the nurse listened. And indeed a man whose heart is pretty clean can indulge in this pursuit with an enjoyment that never ceases, and is only perhaps the more keen because it is secret and has a touch of sadness in it; because he is of his mood and humour lonely, and apart although not alone.”
Individual character, however, is the deeper and more interesting study; and the writings prompted by genius which delights more in the habits and qualities and casual self-delineations of man than in man himself, always disappoint us by our half-acquaintance with the personages of the story. As for the subsidiary middle-distance people, this matters little. We know as much as we wish to do of Sir Pitt Crawley, of Lord Steyne, of the Major, of Jack Belsize, of Mrs. Hobson Newcome, of Mrs. Mackenzie; but how glad should we be to see more into the real heart of Major Dobbin, of Becky, even of Osborne of Warrington, of Laura; even of shallow and worldly Pendennis, how partial and
[Page 182]
limited, how merely external, is our conception! What do we know really of the Colonel, beyond that atmosphere of kindliness and honesty which surrounds one of the most delightful creations poet ever drew? But why complain? Distinctness and completeness of conception are two qualities divided among artists; to one this, to the other that; rarely, perhaps never, has any single man been gifted with a large measure of both. If Mr. Thackeray's genius is not of the very highest order, it is the very highest of its kind. The vividness, the accuracy of his delineation goes far to compensate for a certain want of deeper insight. Let us be grateful for what he gives us, rather than grumble because it is not more. Let us take him as that which he is—a daguerreotypist of the world about us. He is great in costume, in minutiæ too great; he leans too much on them; his figures are to Shakespeare's what Madame Tussaud's waxworks are to the Elgin Marbles—they are exact figures from modern life, and the resemblance is effected somewhat too much by the aid of externals; but there is a matchless sharpness, an elaborateness and finish of detail and circumstantiality about his creations. He has an art peculiarly his own of reproducing every-day language with just enough additional sparkle or humour or pathos of his own to make it piquant and entertaining without losing vraisemblance. His handling of his subject, his execution, are so skilful and masterly, that they for ever hold the attention alive. He takes a commonplace and makes a novelty of it, as a potter makes a jug out of a lump of clay by turning it round in his hands; he tells you page after page of ordinary incident with the freshness of a perennial spring. He is master of the dramatic method which has of late preponderated so much over the narrative. Perhaps the greatest attraction of his writings consists in the wonderful appropriateness of the language and sentiments he puts into the mouths of his various characters; and he not only makes them express themselves, but he manages, without any loss of dramatic propriety, to heighten the tone so as to give some charm or other to what every one says; and not only this, but with an ease which veils consummate dexterity, he makes these dramatic speeches carry on the action and even convey the author's private inuendo. He has no scruple about this. He alters a woman's thought just enough to make it the vehicle for a sarcasm of his own.
“On this the two ladies went through the osculatory ceremony which they were in the habit of performing, and Mrs. Pendennis got a great secret comfort from the little quarrel, for Laura's confession seemed to say: ‘That girl can never be a wife for Pen, for she is light-minded and heartless, and quite unworthy of our noble hero . He will be sure to find out her unworthiness for his own part, and then he will be saved from this flighty creature and awake out of his delusion.’”
[Page 183]
If the power of producing the impression of reality were the test of the highest creative power, Thackeray would perhaps rank higher than any one who has ever lived,—higher than Defoe. But Thackeray's mode of creating an impression of reality is more complicated than Defoe's. It is not that simple act of force by which the latter identifies himself with his hero. It arises in great measure from his way of knitting his narrative on at every point to some link of our every-day experience. His fiction is like a net, every mesh of which has a connecting knot with actual life. Many novelists have a world of their own they inhabit. Thackeray thrusts his characters in among the moving every-day world in which we live. We don't say they are life-like characters; they are mere people. We feel them to be near us, and that we may meet them any day. Dickens creates a race of beings united to us by common sympathies and affections, endeared to us by certain qualities, and infinitely amusing in their eccentricities. Still, we all know perfectly well they are not really human beings; though they are enough so for his purpose and ours. No one supposes that Carker ever really rode on that bay horse of his to the city with those shining teeth; that Traddle's hair really had power to force open a pocket-book. We know that the trial of Bardell v . Pickwick is an imaginary contribution to our judicial records, and that Edith Dombey exists only in highflown language and the exigencies of melodrama. But the Major frequents Bond Street, Mrs. Hobson Newcome's virtue is a thing of this life and of London, and it is but one step from questioning the existence of Becky's finished little house in Curzon Street to admitting the philosophy of Berkeley. All artists have an ultimate aim which shapes their working. Miss Bronte wishes to depict marked character; Dickens bends himself to elicit the humorous element in things; Bulwer supposes that he has a philosophy to develop; Disraeli sets himself to be himself admired. Thackeray only desires to be a mirror, to give a true but a brilliant reflection; his vision is warped, no doubt, by peculiarities of his own; but his aim is to reproduce the world as he sees it.
His conception of a story is, like his conception of a character, incomplete. There is no reason why he should begin where he does, no reason why he should end at all. He cuts a square out of life, just as much as he wants, and sends it to Bradbury and Evans. In Vanity Fair and Pendennis the characters are at large, and might at any moment be gathered in to a conclusion. The Newcomes begins with the history of Clive's grandfather, and the reasons are independent of art which cause it to conclude before the death of his grandchildren. This, however, is little more than a technical shortcoming, and certainly does not much affect
[Page 184]
the reader, to whom skill in the conduct of the story is infinitely more important. And in the conduct of his story, in the management of his narrative, in the interlinking of incident, the way in which one character is made to elucidate another, in which every speech and every entrance carries on the action, in the ease, the grace, the hidden skill with which the intricate complication of interests and events are handled and developed, Mr. Thackeray justly claims our highest admiration. In all that belongs to execution he shows a mastery that almost makes us think he has some secret peculiar power, so effortless is his brilliancy, so easy his touch. His tale is like a landscape growing under the instinctive rather than conscious hand of a master.
The novelist who draws the external life of men is subject to this disadvantage: he is more dependent on his experience than the one who makes individual character his end. It is true, we apprehend, that a poet can, by the force of imagination, and the excitement of particular parts of his nature so as to produce temporary identification, create a character which he has never seen. Goethe bears witness to the fact in his own case. He tells us he drew in his youth characters of which he had no experience, and the truthfulness of which was justified by his mature observation. His evidence is peculiarly valuable, both because no man estimated observation higher, and because his great skill in it would enable him to apply an adequate test to the accuracy of the delineations which he speaks of as springing ready-formed from the resources of his own nature. Of course, even granting that a man could be entirely independent of observation in his conception of a character, he would still require it in order to find a field for the display of that conception; and the more knowledge he commands, the better can he develop his idea. Less, however, will suffice for such an artist than for one who works like Thackeray or Fielding. These are absolutely bounded by the limits of their observation, and consequently in constant danger of self-repetition. Mr. Thackeray is remarkable rather for his exhaustless ingenuity in making the most of the knowledge he possesses than for any very wide range. His fertility becomes the more remarkable when we survey the resources on which he draws. His field is not an extensive one. He stands on the debatable land between the aristocracy and the middle classes —that is his favourite position—and he has evidently observed this form of life mainly from dining-rooms and drawing-rooms. He surveys mankind from the club-room and from country-houses; he has seen soldiers chiefly at mess-dinners; is not familiar with lawyers, though he is with the Temple; has seen a good deal of a painter's life, and must of course have had a considerable
[Page 185]
knowledge of the professional world of letters, though he is shy of profiting by this experience. He is not at home in provincial life in England, especially town-life, nor has he any extensive acquaintance with the feelings and habits of the lower classes. His knowledge of men about town is profound, exhaustive; his acquaintance among footmen vast. He may have more materials in store; but he begins to indicate a check in the extent of his resources. We know the cartle-du-pays pretty well now, and have a notion where the boundary-fence runs. The extraordinary thing is the immense variety of the surface within it.
There is one direction, however, in which Mr. Thackeray's resources have always been remarkably limited. It is curious how independent he is of thought; how he manages to exist so entirely on the surface of things. Perhaps he is the better observer of manners because he never cares to penetrate below them. He never refers to a principle, or elucidates a rule of action. But this latter is a characteristic which belongs rather to his character as a moralist than an artist. What we are now concerned with is the absence from his books of what we are accustomed to call ideas. In this respect Thackeray is as inferior to Fielding, as in some others we cannot help thinking him superior. Fielding, you cannot help seeing as you read, was a reflecting man; you feel that his writings are backed by a body of thought, though it is far from an intrusive element in them. Defoe always leaves the impression of an active, vigorous intellect. The force of Thackeray's writings is derived from the strength of his feelings; great genius he has, and general vigour of mind, but not the intellectus cogitabundus . Read his charming and eloquent Lectures on the Humorists. You would suppose that thought would ooze out there if any where; but there is no trace of it. He simply states his impressions about the men; and when he speaks of their personal characters, every deference is to be paid to the conception of one who has so sensitive an apprehension of the distinguishing traits of various natures. We are far from wishing for a change in the method of the book; we believe the sort of quiet mediative way in which Mr. Thackeray touches and feels about and probes these men is more valuable and instructive than any elaborate reasonings on them would be, and infinitely better calculated to convey just impressions of what they really were like. But the omission of thought is not the less a characteristic feature; and on one of the pages, where a note of Coleridge is appended to Thackeray's estimate of Sterne, it is curious to see two such utterly opposite modes of approaching a subject brought into juxtaposition. Thackeray never reasons, he never gains one step by deduction; he
[Page 186]
relies on his instincts, he appeals to the witness within us; he makes his statement, and leaves it to find its own way to the conviction of his readers; either it approves itself to you, and you accept it, or it does not, and you leave it. The highest moral truths have been thus enunciated, perhaps can only be thus enunciated; but Mr. Thackeray does not enunciate great truths. The most he does is to generalise on his social observation. He is not absolutely destitute of some of those distilled results of a wide knowledge of men which properly come under the head of wisdom; but they are very disproportioned to the extent and penetration of his perception. He occupies a good deal of space in half-meditative, half-emotional harangues on the phenomena of life. Where these do not immediately deal with the affections, they owe their novelty and value to their form alone; and it would not be difficult to enumerate his chief ideas, and count how often they occur. He impresses on us very constantly that “the Peerage” is the Upas-book of English society; that our servants sit in judgment on us below stairs; that good wages make a better nurse than love; that bankers marry earls' daughters, and vice versâ ; that the pangs of disappointed passion stop short of death; that no man making a schedule of his debts ever included them all. We need not go through the list; and trite as such sayings seem when stripped bare for enumeration, the author for ever invests them with some fresh charm of expression or illustration, which goes far to preserve them from becoming wearisome. It is with the feelings and the affections that Mr. Thackeray is at home. They supply with him the place of reasoning-power. Hence he penetrates deeper into the characters of women than of men. He has never drawn, nor can he ever draw, a man of strong convictions or thoughtful mind; and even in women he deals almost exclusively with the instinctive and emotional side of their nature. This feature gives a certain thinness and superficiality to Mr. Thackeray's works. He nowhere leaves the mark of a thinker. Even his insight is keen and delicate rather than profound. But his deep and tender feeling makes him sensitive to those suggestions which occupy the boundary-land between the affections and the intellect, the country of vain regrets and tender memories, of chastened hopes and softened sadness, the harvest-field in every human soul of love and death. The voice of Mr. Thackeray's tenderness is at once sweet and manly; and when he will allow us to feel sure he is not sneering at himself, its tone is not unworthy to speak to the most sacred recesses of the heart.
“Do we wish to apologise for Pen because he has got a white hat, and because his mourning for his mother is fainter? All the lapse of years, all the career of fortune, all the events of life, however
[Page 187]
strongly they may move or eagerly excite him, never can remove that sainted image from his heart, or banish that blessed love from its sanctuary. If he yields to wrong, the dear eyes will look sadly upon him when he dares to meet them; if he does well, endures pain, or conquers temptation, the ever-present love will greet him, he knows, with approval and pity; if he falls, plead for him; if he suffers, cheer him;—be with him and accompany him always until death is past, and sorrow and sin are no more. Is this mere dreaming, or, on the part of an idle story-teller, useless moralising? May not the man of the world take his moment, too, to be grave and thoughtful? Ask of your own hearts and memories, brother and sister, if we do not live in the dead; and (to speak reverently) prove God by love?”
Is there in the range of fiction any thing more touching than the conception which took the shattered heart of the old Colonel to rest among the pensioners of Grey Friars?
Mr. Thackeray's pathos is good; but his humour is better, more original, more searching. He never rests in the simply ludicrous or absurd. Irony is the essence of his wit. His books are one strain of it. He plays with his own characters. In the simplest things they say the author himself gets a quiet backstroke at them. It is not enough for him to depict a man ridiculous, he makes him himself expose his own absurdities, and gathers a zest from the unconsciousness with which he does so. He treats his dramatis personæ as if he were playing off real men. His wit is not a plaything, but a weapon, and must cut something whenever it falls; it may be a goodnatured blow, but it must touch some one. He never fences against the wall. His satire is most bitter when he is most cool. He is skilful in the management of sneer and inuendo, and can strike a heavy blow with a light weapon. For his broadest absurdities he chooses the form of burlesque, and then he likes to have a definite something to parody. He is one who does not laugh at his own story. It is not often he makes his reader laugh; but he can do it if he will. Foker is the best of his more laughable creations. In general he is grave, composed, even sad, but he is never uninterested in the personal adventures he is engaged in narrating; his sympathies are always keenly alive, though often he prefers to conceal how they are enlisted. At bottom he has a warm, almost a passionate interest in his own creations. They are realities to him as to the rest of the world.
His peculiar powers must tempt him to personality, but in any open form of it he does not now indulge. The early days of Blackwood and Fraser are gone by. There was a time, however, when he gave “Sawedwadgeorgeearllittnbulwig” a very severe, though not ungenerous shaking; and when himself attacked by the Times he turned and bit fiercely and sharply. He
[Page 188]
is apt to wear the forms of his wit to tatters. Jeames, with his peculiar dialect, in the Yellowplush Papers and elsewhere, was entertaining and instructive, but has been allowed to grow wearisome. Orthographical absurdity is an exhaustible subject of merriment, and Mr. Thackeray's wit is somewhat too much dependent on his nice appreciation of distinctions of pronunciation, and the slavish subserviency he compels from the art of spelling. He can mimic in print as well or better than Dickens. His sense of humour differs from that of the latter, however, in being almost exclusively called forth by the peculiarities of persons themselves, or personal relations. He very rarely is struck with the ludicrous in things alone, as Dickens often is; his description of Costigan's hairbrush, as “a wonderful and ancient piece,” stands almost by itself; he rarely even makes fun out of a man's personal appearance, except so far as his dress or air indicate some mental trait or characteristic. The mode of his caricaturing, too, is quite different. Dickens collects all the absurdities and laughter-moving elements in a thing, and heaps them together in a new image of his own. Thackeray pictures the thing as it is, only bringing out its ludicrous or contemptible features into sharp relief.
His genius does not lead him to the poetic form; he has just that command of verse which one would expect from a man of his great ability; he can make an able use of it, and his power of language gives him great command of rhyme and sufficient facility. His verses are generally reproductions; free renderings from another language with new point and application, parodies or humorous narratives of actual incident. Among these the “Chronicle of the Drum” is the best. It is thoroughly French, dramatic, and spirit-stirring. “Jacob Homnium's Hoss” far surpasses all his other humorous efforts in verse. It will bear recalling; and we will quote it as a specimen at once of his rhyming powers, his dexterously ridiculous orthography, and his wit, for it is not easy to give a prose extract to exemplify the character of the latter. He is too good an artist to let it stand in lumps,—he uses it as the gilding of his whole narrative.
JACOB HOMNIUM'S HOSS.
a new pallice-court chaunt .
One sees in Viteall Yard,
    Vere pleacemen do resort,
A wenerable hinstitute,
    'Tis call'd the Pallis Court:
A gent as got his i on it;
    I think 'twill make some sport.
[Page 189]
The nature of this Court
    My hindignation riles:
A few fat legal spiders
    Here sit & spin their viles;
To rob the town theyr privlege is,
    In a hayrea of twelve miles.
The Judge of this year Court
    Is a mellitary beak,
He knows no more of Lor
    Than praps he does of Greek,
And prowides hisself a deputy
    Because he cannot speak.
Four counsel in this Court—
    Misnamed of Justice—sits;
These lawyers owes their places to
    Their money, not their wits;
And there's six attornies under them,
    As here their living gits.
These lawyers, six and four,
    Was a livin at their ease,
A sendin of their writs abowt,
    And droring in the fees,
When their erose a cirkimstance
    As is like to make a breeze.
It now is some monce since,
    A gent both good and trew
Possest an ansum oss vith vich
    He didn know what to do:
Peraps he did not like the oss,
    Peraps he was a scru.
This gentleman his oss
    At Tattersall's did lodge;
There came a wulgar oss-dealer,
    This gentleman's name did fodge,
And took the oss from Tattersall's:
    Wasn that a artful dodge?
One day this gentleman's groom
    This willian did spy out
A mounted on this oss,
    A ridin him about;
“Get out of that there oss, you rogue,”
    Speaks up the groom so stout.
The thief was cruel whex'd
    To find hisself so pinn'd;
The oss began to whinny,
    The honest groom he grinn'd;
And the raskle thief got off the oss,
    And cut avay like vind.
And phansy with what joy
    The master did regard
His dearly bluvd lost oss again
    Trot in the stable yard!
[Page 190]
Who was this master good
    Of whomb I makes these rhymes?
His name is Jacob Homnium, Exquire;
    And if I 'd committed crimes,
Good Lord! I wouldn't ave that mann
    Attack me in the Times !
Now shortly after, the groomb
    His master's oss did take up,
There came a livery-man
    This gentleman to wake up;
And he handed in a little bill,
    Which hanger'd Mr. Jacob.
For two pound seventeen
    This livery-man eplied,
For the keep of Mr. Jacob's oss,
    Which the thief had took to ride.
“Do you see anythink green in me?”
    Mr. Jacob Homnium cried.
“Because a raskle chews
    My oss away to robb,
And goes tick at your Mews
    For seven-and-fifty bobb,
Shall I be call'd to pay?—It is
    A iniquitious Jobb.”
Thus Mr. Jacob cut
    The conwasation short;
The livery-man went ome,
    Detummingd to ave sport,
And summingsd Jacob Homnium, Exquire,
    Into the Pallis Court.
Pore Jacob went to Court,
    A Counsel for to fix,
And choose a barrister out of the four,
    An attorney of the six;
And there he sor these men of Lor,
    And watch'd 'em at their tricks.
The dreadful day of trile
    In the Pallis Court did come;
The lawyers said their say,
    The Judge look'd wery glum,
And then the British Jury cast
    Pore Jacob Hom-ni-um.
O a weary day was that
    For Jacob to go through;
The deot was two seventeen
    (Which he no mor owed than you),
And then there was the plaintives costs,
    Eleven pound six and two.
And then there was his own,
    Which the lawyers they did fix
At the wery moderit figgar
    Of ten pound one and six.
[Page 191]
Now Evins bless the Pallis Court,
    And all its bold ver-dicks!
I cannot settingly tell
    If Jacob swaw and cust,
At aving for to pay this sumb,
    But I should think he must,
And av drawn a cheque for 24 l . 4 s . 8 d .
    With most igstreme disgust.
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
His sense of beauty is warm and lively. If he had as much of the negative sense of good taste which discards the ugly and jarring elements as he has of the positive sense which detects and appreciates the beautiful, his works would be far pleasanter reading. He sees beauty every where; his love of it mingles with the affectionateness of his nature, and throws a softening grace over his pages, relieving a bitterness which without it would sometimes be scarcely sufferable. Though his genius leads him to deal with men, external nature has no light charms for him. He does not often paint landscape, but he can do so in brief exquisite touches. Most of us are familiar with some such a German scene as this:
“Pleasant Rhine gardens! Fair scenes of peace and sunshine; noble purple mountains, whose crests are reflected in the magnificent stream; who has ever seen you that has not a grateful memory of those scenes of friendly repose and beauty? To lay down the pen, and even to think of that beautiful Rhineland, makes one happy. At this time of summer-evening the cows are trooping down from the hills, lowing, and with their bells tinkling, to the old town, with its old moats, and gates, and spires, and chestnut-trees, with long blue shadows stretching over the grass; the sky and the river below flame in crimson and gold; and the moon is already out, looking pale towards the sunset. The sun sinks behind the great castle-crested mountains; the night falls suddenly; the river grows darker and darker; lights quiver in it from the windows in the old ramparts, and twinkle peacefully in the villages under the hills on the opposite shore.”
Of his bad taste his works furnish only too abundant evidence. It was a happy idea to look at society from the footman's point of view; but a very little of that sort of fun suffices. And Mr. Thackeray does not scruple to surfeit us. We have rough Warrington's excellent authority for the assertion, that “Mrs. Flanagan the laundress, and Betty the housemaid, are not the company a gentleman should choose for permanent association;” and we are not surprised at that “most igstrorinary” burst of indignation with which Jeames's career draws to its close in the Yellowplush Papers .
The advantage of using such a mouthpiece, if it be an advantage,
[Page 192]
is this, that it gives an opportunity of saying things more vulgar, biting, and personal, than a man's self-respect or shame would allow him to say out of his own mouth. It is a quasi shifting of the responsibility. But if we give Sheridan credit for his wit, we must give Thackeray credit for his vulgarity. This feature greatly disfigures his works, and shows itself not only in the gusto and case with which he enters into the soul of a footman, but in a love of searching out and bringing into prominent view the more petty and ignoble sides of all things. We don't quarrel with a humorist for exposing the vulgar element in a vulgar man, and in taking all the fun he can out of it. Self-delineative dramatic vulgarity, used in moderation, is one of the fairest and readiest sources of laughter. What we quarrel with is vulgarity in the tone of the work; a charge for which it is not very easy to cite chapter and verse, as it is a thing which is felt by the instinct rather than detected by observation; but we will adduce one instance of the sort of thing we allude to. In the first volume of The Newcomes we are told how Warrington and Pendennis gave a little entertainment at the Temple, including among their guests little Rosey and her mother. It is a very pleasant charming picture, and the narrator speaks of the “merry songs and kind faces,” the “happy old dingy chambers illuminated by youthful sunshine.” What unhappy prompting, then, makes him drop this blot on his description: “I may say, without false modesty, that our little entertainment was most successful. The champagne was iced to a nicety. The ladies did not perceive that our laundress, Mrs. Flanagan, was intoxicated very early in the afternoon .” And before the end of the description we are not spared another allusion to “Mrs. Flanagan in a state of excitement.” It is vulgar, surely, to mar the pure and pleasant impression of the scene with this image of the drunken laundress not only introduced, but insisted on.
Not from false taste, but from something deeper,—a warp in the very substance of his genius,—arises another unwelcome characteristic. Vanity Fair is the name, not of one, but of all Mr. Thackeray's books. The disappointment that waits upon human desires, whether in their fulfilment or their destruction, the emptiness of worldly things, the frailty of the affections, the sternness of fate, the hopelessness of endeavour, vanitas vanitatum ,—these are his themes. The impression left by his books is that of weariness; the stimulants uphold you while you read; and then comes just such a reaction as if you had really mingled closely in the great world with no hopes or ambitions outside it; you feel the dust in your throat, the din and the babbling echo in your ears. Art may touch the deepest sources of passion: awe and grief and almost terror are as much within her province as laughter and calm;
[Page 193]
she may shake the heart, and leave it quivering with emotions whose intensity partakes of pain; but to make it unsatisfied, restless, anxious,—this is not her province. To steep it in the turmoil, the harass, the perpetual shortcomings of actual life, may possibly be sometimes permissible. But this must only be for a brief period —it is a very exceptional source of excitement; and to drop the curtain and leave the mind jaded with small discontents, perplexed with unsolved difficulties, and saddened with the shortcomings of fruition,—this is to be false to the high and soothing influences of art, and to misuse the power she gives. Those old story-books show a deeper sense of her true province who marry a couple and tell us they lived happily till they died, than Mr. Thackeray, who cannot forbear from turning over one more page to show us the long-beloved and hardly-won Amelia scarcely sufficing to her husband, and who brings back the noble-hearted Laura to teach us that she cannot escape the consequences to her own demeanour and character of having married a man so far inferior to herself.
As a Moralist, his philosophy might be called a religious stoicism rooted in fatalism. The stoicism is patient and manly; kindly though melancholy. It is not a hardened endurance of adverse fate, so much as an unexamining inactive submission to the divine will. This temper pervades his writings, and he has sung its gentler mood in a sweet autumnal, not hopeless exactly but hope-ignoring, strain:
“We bow to Heaven, that will'd it so,
    That darkly rules the fate of all;
That sends the respite or the blow,
    That's free to give, or to recall.
This crowns his feast with wine and wit:
    Who brought him to that mirth and state?
His betters, see, below him sit,
    Or hunger hopeless at the gate.
Who bade the mud from Dives' wheel
    To spurn the rags of Lazarus?
Come, brother, in that dust we'll kneel,
    Confessing Heaven that ruled it thus.
So each shall mourn, in life's advance,
    Dear hopes, dear friends, untimely kill'd;
Shall grieve for many a forfeit chance,
    And longing passion unfulfilled.
Amen! whatever fate be sent,
    Pray God the heart may kindly glow,
Although the head with cares be bent,
    And whitened with the winter snow.
Come wealth or want, come good or ill,
    Let young and old accept their part,
And bow before the Awful Will;
    And bear it with an honest heart,
[Page 194]
Who misses, or who wins the prize.
    Go, lose or conquer as you can;
But if you fail, or if you rise,
    Be each, pray God, a gentleman.”
His fatalism is connected with a strong sense of the powerlessness of the human will. He is a profound sceptic. Not a sceptic in religious conviction, or one who ignores devotional feeling,—far from it; but a sceptic of principles, of human will, of the power in man to ascertain his duties or direct his aims. He believs in God out of the world . He loves to represent man as tossing on the wild sea, driven to and fro by wind and waves, landing now on some shining fortunate isle, where the affections find happy rest, and now driven forth again into the night and storm; consoled and strengthened now and then by the bright gleams above him; dexterous with his helm to avoid or conquer the adverse elements; but destitute of all knowledge of navigation, and with no port to steer for and no compass to guide his course. Pleasure, he tells you, may and perhaps should be plucked while you are young; but he warns you the zest will fail; he warns you that gratified ambition will taste like ashes in the mouth, that fame is a delusion, that the affections, the sole good of life, are often helpless under the foot of adverse fortune, and neither so powerful nor so permanent as we dream; and he can only recommend you to enjoy honestly, to suffer bravely, and to wear a patient face. He speaks to you as one fellow-subject to another of the Prince of this world. He has no call to set things right, no prompting to examine into the remedy. His vocation is to show the time as it is, and especially where it is out of joint. His philosophy is to accept men and things as they are.
He is a very remarkable instance of the mode in which the force of the intellect affects the moral nature and convictions. We apprehend he never asked “why?” in his life, except perhaps to prove to another that he had no because. With a very strong sense of the obligation of moral truthfulness, and the profoundest respect for, and sympathy with, simplicity and straightforwardness of character, he has no interest in intellectual conclusions. He would never have felt sufficient interest to ask with Pilate, “What is truth?” Always occupied with moral symptoms, intently observing men, and deeply interested in their various modes of meeting the perplexities of life, he never attempts to decide a moral question. He rarely discusses one at all; and when he does so, he is studiously careful to avoid throwing his weight into either scale. Elsewhere ready enough to show in his proper person, he here shrinks anxiously out of sight. Sometimes he warns you expressly he will not be responsible
[Page 195]
for what he is putting into the mouth of one of his characters; or more often he treats the subject like a shuttlecock, raps it to and fro between two dramatic disputants, and lets it fall in the middle for those to pick up who list.
From this form of mind springs, in great measure, that scepticism to which we have alluded. A writer can scarcely help being sceptical who sees all sides of a question, but has gathered no principles to help him to choose among them; who has no guiding rules to which to refer, and whose instincts alone prevent the field of his conscience from being an absolute chaos. Only by these instincts he tests the characters of men and the propriety of actions; and wherever they alone can serve as guides, they do so faithfully, for in him they are honest and noble.
The best possible exposition of this turn of mind is that which Mr. Thackeray has put into the mouth of Pendennis; and if, in spite of the quasi disclaimer of it, we take it as a more or less fair expression of the author's own spirit, it is because it accords closely with other marks of it scattered throughout his works.
“‘A little while since, young one,’ Warrington said, who had been listening to his friend's confessions neither without sympathy nor scorn, for his mood led him to indulge in both, ‘you asked me why I remained out of the strife of the world, and looked on at the great labour of my neighbour without taking any part in the struggle? Why, what a mere dilettante you own yourself to be, in this confession of general scepticism, and what a listless spectator yourself! You are six-and-twenty years old, and as blasé as a rake of sixty. You neither hope much, nor care much, nor believe much. You doubt about other men as much as about yourself. Were it made of such pococuranti as you, the world would be intolerable; and I had rather live in a wilderness of monkeys, and listen to their chatter, than in a company of men who denied every thing.’
“‘Were the world composed of Saint Bernards or Saint Dominics, it would be equally odious,’ said Pen; ‘and at the end of a few score years would cease to exist altogether. Would you have every man with his head shaved, and every woman in a cloister,—carrying out to the full the ascetic principle? Would you have conventicle-hymns twanging from every lane in every city in the world? Would you have all the birds of the forest sing one note and fly with one feather? You call me a sceptic because I acknowledge what is ; and in acknowledging that, be it linnet or lark, or priest or parson; be it, I mean, any single one of the infinite varieties of the creatures of God (whose very name I would be understood to pronounce with reverence, and never to approach but with distant awe), I say that the study and acknowledgment of that variety amongst men especially increases our respect and wonder for the Creator, Commander, and Ordainer of all these minds, so different and yet so united,—meeting in a common adoration, and offering up, each according to his degree and means of approaching the Divine
[Page 196]
centre, his acknowledgment of praise and worship, each singing (to recur to the bird-simile) his natural song.’
“‘And so, Arthur, the hymn of a saint, or the ode of a poet, or the chant of a Newgate thief, are all pretty much the same in your philosophy,’ said George.
“‘Even that sneer could be answered were it to the point,’ Pendennis replied; ‘but it is not; and it could be replied to you, that even to the wretched outcry of the thief on the tree, the wisest and the best of all teachers we know of, the untiring Comforter and Consoler, promised a pitiful hearing and a certain hope. Hymns of saints! Odes of poets! who are we to measure the chances and opportunities, the means of doing, or even judging, right and wrong, awarded to men; and to establish the rule for meting out their punishments and rewards? We are as insolent and unthinking in judging of men's morals as of their intellects. We admire this man as being a great philosopher, and set down the other as a dullard, not knowing either, or the amount of truth in either, or being certain of the truth any where. We sing Te Deum for this hero who has won a battle, and De profundis for that other one who has broken out of prison, and has been caught afterwards by the policemen. Our measure of rewards and punishments is most partial and incomplete, absurdly inadequate, utterly worldly; and we wish to continue it into the next world. Into that next and awful world we strive to pursue men, and send after them our impotent party verdicts of condemnation or acquittal. We set up our paltry little rods to measure Heaven immeasurable, as if, in comparison to that, Newton's mind, or Pascal's, or Shakspeare's, was any loftier than mine; as if the ray which travels from the sun would reach me sooner than the man who blacks my boots. Measured by that altitude, the tallest and the smallest among us are so alike diminutive and pitifully base, that I say we should take no count of the calculation, and it is a meanness to reckon the difference.’
“‘Your figure fails there, Arthur,’ said the other, better pleased; ‘if even by common arithmetic we can multiply as we can reduce almost infinitely, the Great Reckoner must take count of all: and the small is not small, or the great great, to his infinity.’
“‘I don't call those calculations in question,’ Arthur said; ‘I only say that yours are incomplete and premature; false in consequence, and, by every operation, multiplying into wider error. I do not condemn the men who killed Socrates and damned Galileo. I say that they damned Galileo and killed Socrates.’    ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
“In these speculations and confessions of Arthur, the reader may perhaps see allusions to questions which, no doubt, have occupied and discomposed himself, and which he may have answered by very different solutions to those come to by our friend. We are not pledging ourselves for the correctness of his opinions, which readers will please to consider are delivered dramatically, the writer being no more answerable for them, than for the sentiments uttered by any other character of the story: our endeavour is merely to follow out, in its progress, the development of the mind of a worldly and selfish, but not ungenerous
[Page 197]
or unkind or truth-avoiding man. And it will be seen that the lamentable stage to which his logic at present has brought him, is one of general scepticism and sneering acquiescence in the world as it is; or if you like so to call it, a belief qualified with scorn in all things extant. The tastes and habits of such a man prevent him from being a boisterous demagogue, and his love of truth and dislike of cant keep him from advancing crude propositions, such as many loud reformers are constantly ready with; much more of uttering downright falsehoods in arguing questions or abusing opponents, which he would die or starve rather than use. It was not in our friend's nature to be able to utter certain lies; nor was he strong enough to protest against others, except with a polite sneer; his maxim being, that he owed obedience to all acts of parliament, as long as they were not repealed.
“And to what does this easy and sceptical life lead a man? Friend Arthur was a Sadducee, and the Baptist might be in the Wilderness shouting to the poor, who were listening with all their might and faith to the preacher's awful accents and denunciations of wrath or woe or salvation; and our friend the Sadducee would turn his sleek mule with a shrug and a smile from the crowd, and go home to the shade of his terrace, and muse over preacher and audience, and turn to his roll of Plato, or his pleasant Greek song-book babbling of honey and Hybla, and nymphs and fountains of love. To what, we say, does this scepticism lead? It leads a man to a shameful loneliness and selfishness, so to speak—the more shameful, because it is so good-humoured and conscienceless and serene. Conscience! What is conscience? Why accept remorse? What is public or private faith? Mythuses alike enveloped in enormous tradition. If, seeing and acknowledging the lies of the world, Arthur, as see them you can with only too fatal a clearness, you submit to them without any protest farther than a laugh: if, plunged yourself in easy sensuality, you allow the whole wretched world to pass groaning by you unmoved: if the fight for the truth is taking place, and all men of honour are on the ground armed on the one side or the other, and you alone are to lie on your balcony and smoke your pipe out of the noise and the danger,—you had better have died, or never have been at all, than such a sensual coward.
“‘The truth, friend!’ Arthur said, imperturbably; ‘where is the truth? Show it me. That is the question between us. I see it on both sides. I see it in the Conservative side of the house, and amongst the Radicals, and even on the Ministerial benches. I see it in this man who worships by act of parliament, and is rewarded with a silk apron and five thousand a year; in that man, who, driven fatally by the remorseless logic of his creed, gives up every thing, friends, fame, dearest ties, closest vanities, the respect of an army of churchmen, the recognised position of a leader, and passes over, truth-impelled, to the enemy, in whose ranks he is ready to serve henceforth as a nameless private soldier:—I see the truth in that man, as I do in his brother, whose logic drives him to quite a different conclusion, and who, after having passed a life in vain endeavours to reconcile an irreconcilable book, flings it at last down in despair, and declares, with tearful eyes, and
[Page 198]
hands up to heaven, his revolt and recantation. If the truth is with all these, why should I take side with any one of them? Some are called upon to preach: let them preach. Of these preachers there are somewhat too many, methinks, who fancy they have the gift. But we cannot all be parsons in church, that is clear. Some must sit silent, and listen, or go to sleep mayhap. Have we not all our duties? The head charity-boy blows the bellows; the master canes the other boys in the organ-loft; the clerk sings out Amen from the desk; and the beadle with the staff opens the door for his Reverence, who rustles in silk up to the cushion. I won't cane the boys, nay, or say Amen always, or act as the church's champion or warrior, in the shape of the beadle with the staff; but I will take off my hat in the place, and say my prayers there too, and shake hands with the clergyman as he steps on the grass outside. Don't I know that his being there is a compromise, and that he stands before me an act of parliament? That the church he occupies was built for other worship? That the Methodist chapel is next door; and that Bunyan the tinker is bawling out the tidings of damnation on the common hard by? Yes, I am a Sadducee; and I take things as I find them, and the world, and the acts of parliament of the world, as they are.’”
On which side is the author? On neither, or rather on both. He thinks Arthur very wrong, and is not sure he has not the best of the argument. Pendennis is throughout the least agreeable of Mr. Thackeray's fictions. A work more purposeless, or one in which all grounds of action and elements of judgment are more distorted and confused, it is scarcely possible to imagine. Arthur Pendennis is represented as a young man of warm impetuous feelings, a lively intellect, much self-conceit, and a natural selfishness of disposition fostered by early indulgence. The highest and sole attractive points in his character are a sense of honour and a capacity for love. In early youth he is carried away by an impetuous passion for an uneducated woman, whose beauty is her sole attraction. Forcibly weaned from his first devotion, he goes to college, where his sole ambition is for social display, and where he falls a victim to his vanity and weakness. Returning home, he idles away some time, entangling himself more or less with a clever wicked little flirt in the neighbourhood. He goes to London, takes to review-writing as a means of support, strives to write honestly; has written a novel, dresses it up for the public, publishes it, and gains a reputation by it; moves meanwhile, by the interest of his uncle—a thorough man of the world and of the clubs—among high circles of fashionable life, and loves to study them and all other forms of life; lives in every way—in earning his maintenance, in intellect, in emotion—from hand to mouth; has no ambition, no convictions, and is utterly destitute of any object in life and of any incitement to action beyond the
[Page 199]
temporary requisitions or the chance stimulants of the day. And thus Mr. Thackeray moralises on his life:
“Was Pendennis becoming worldly, or only seeing the world, or both? and is a man very wrong for being after all only a man? Which is the most reasonable, and does his duty best: he who stands aloof from the struggle of life, calmly contemplating it, or he who descends to the ground, and takes his part in the contest? ‘That philosopher,’ Pen said, ‘had held a great place amongst the leaders of the world, and enjoyed to the full what it had to give of rank and riches, renown and pleasure, who came, weary-hearted, out of it, and said that all was vanity and vexation of spirit. Many a teacher of those whom we reverence, and who steps out of his carriage up to his carved cathedral place, shakes his lawn ruffles over the velvet cushion, and cries out, that the whole struggle is an accursed one, and the works of the world are evil. Many a conscience-stricken mystic flies from it altogether, and shuts himself out from it within convent-walls (real or spiritual), whence he can only look up to the sky, and contemplate the heaven out of which there is no rest and no good.
“‘But the earth, where our feet are, is the work of the same Power as the immeasurable blue yonder, in which the future lies into which we would peer. Who ordered toil as the condition of life, ordered weariness, ordered sickness, ordered poverty, failure, success—to this man a foremost place, to the other a nameless struggle with the crowd —to that a shameful fall, or paralysed limb, or sudden accident—to each some work upon the ground he stands on, until he is laid beneath it.’ While they were talking, the dawn came shining through the windows of the room, and Pen threw them open to receive the fresh morning-air. ‘Look, George,’ said he; ‘look and see the sun rise: he sees the labourer on his way a-field; the work-girl plying her poor needle; the lawyer at his desk, perhaps; the beauty smiling asleep upon her pillow of down; or the jaded reveller reeling to bed; or the fevered patient tossing on it; or the doctor watching by it, over the throes of the mother for the child that is to be born into the world:—to be born and to take his part in the suffering and struggling, the tears and laughter, the crime, remorse, love, folly, sorrow, rest.’”
Pendennis was decidedly becoming worldly, and was very far from being what every man ought to be, and what most men, let us hope, are in at least some higher degree than he was. But Mr. Thackeray must not argue as if we were in danger of charging him with worldliness because he went down into the battle of life and accepted his place among those conditions which the divine wisdom has appointed for the activity of man. It is not this that makes him worldly, but because he has no life and no interests above this struggle to ennoble and give a meaning to it. Because he floats down the stream aimless, and with no thought beyond the momentary excitements of the rapid course. Because he is utterly immersed in worldly interests and worldly enjoyments;
[Page 200]
because his ends, as far as he can be said to have any, as well as his activity, are worldly. This is why we condemn Pendennis. Following this life, he comes accidentally across a charming little porter's daughter, who falls violently in love with him, and for whom he conceives a sudden passion. Not the man to marry thus, he rises superior to trifling with a temptation, and shows resolution and, what he is never indicated as wanting, generous and honourable impulse. Subsequently he consents to marry his old flirting little friend, for whom he has no love (as he honestly tells her), because she brings him wealth and a seat in Parliament. He finds that so dishonourable a condition is annexed to the acceptance of these advantages that he is bound to refuse them; but in doing so he will not break the engagement of honour which binds him to Blanche Amory, although he has discovered that the true learning of his heart is towards Laura, his mother's ward, who has loved him from old times. The faithlessness of his fiancée rescues him, and allows him to marry her whom he really prefers. He does so, and the spirit of his life remains that which was before indicated. He continues a kind-hearted, conceited, clever, self-centered, sceptical man of this world purely. The history concludes with a few sentences, in which the author briefly vindicates it as being a picture in conformity with the actual arrangements of divine providence; and invites us, “knowing how mean the best of us is,” to “give a hand of charity to Arthur Pendennis, with all his faults and shortcomings, who does not claim to be a hero, but only a man and a brother.” We must be allowed to observe in passing, that though we dare not refuse the hand of charity to Mr. Pendennis, it costs a struggle to give it; and that any thing further, such as affection or respect, we are quite unable to feel. We have no wish to be intimate with him. We find him intensely disagreeable, ill-bred, and ostentatiously offensive. But this is purely a personal matter, and may be referred partly to envy of his superior talents, partly to disgust at his inordinate self-conceit. What we have to do with is the moral view taken by the author. It is characteristic that, while professing to lay bare the weaknesses and shortcomings of Pendennis's worldly life, he does not once touch the root of the matter, or indicate the true want of this wasted spirit. To a mind like Arthur's, which measures the emptiness of all worldly subjects of ambition, it is more than to any other essential that it should have some gleam of insight and some practical interest in the higher diviner life which embraces this. And Arthur, orthodox, church-going Christian as he no doubt is, is a practical atheist. With a pure and awful reverence for the manifestations of holiness in others, gazing on a woman praying as with the reverted eyes of one justly banished from Paradise, and himself
[Page 201]
not without pious impulses, he lives without God in the world. And if we were to lay our hand on the most deep-seated failing of Mr. Thackeray's works, we should find it, not in his sneers or in his contemptuous estimate of human nature, but in the low level on which the whole body of his creation stands, and in the narrow boundaries within which the whole is enclosed. We should have no quarrel with an artist who should paint the world as it is, ay, and in far truer colours than Mr. Thackeray dares to use; but then he must embrace the true scope of life, he must not ignore those higher connections from which alone it acquires a purpose, and reduce it to a medley fit only to move the laughter of fools and the tears and scorn of the wise. It is not enough to gaze on the varied conditions of man, and say, We accept them, they are manifestations of the divine will. One can almost imagine that the faith of an animal rises to this uninformed acceptance of the conditions of existence. To man it is granted to touch here and there the general clue of the divine purpose, and to hold ever by that thread which belongs to his individual soul; to him is given a modifying will, a power of choice, and an active energy; of him that highest of all things has been said, that he may be a fellow-worker with God. Even in the minutiæ of his daily life he may follow that service which is perfect freedom, and only not be a servant because he has the higher tenderer invitation to be a child. Is it answered, that these themes are too serious for the novelist, the entertainer of lighter hours, the comic-tale writer? Then we say, that as long as a writer confines himself to fragmentary sketches of life, to its superficial humours or sentiments, the answer is good; and that we have no objection whatever to take the entertainment at its full worth, and laugh gaily with Grimaldi in the pantomime or Mathews in the farce. But Mr. Thackeray never cultivated this sort of literature in spirit, though he may for a time have availed himself of its ordinary forms. His genius is too large, too penetrating, too grave to move in this sphere. He professes to paint human life; and he who does so, and who does not base his conception on that religious substructure which alone makes it other than shreds of flying dreams, is an incomplete artist and a false moralist. And Mr. Thackeray cannot be sheltered behind the assertion that a fitting reverence precludes the intermingling of religious ideas with light literature,—first, because what we ask for does not demand a constant presence of the religious element on the surface, or indeed that it should appear there at all,—only that the spirit of the work and the picture of life should recognise it as at the foundation, or even only not utterly lose sight of it as a fundamental element in the conception of this world; and secondly, because he does not scruple (and fitly, we think) reverently to
[Page 202]
introduce the topic of religion, and to picture a humble spirit looking upwards for consolation and support;—because, while he includes the sentiment , he excludes the realities of religion, and has no place for those aspirations of the higher life, only to form the field for which, was this world he deals with created. And this further quarrel we have with Mr. Thackeray's picture—that he gives a worldly view of the world; that through sarcasm and satire there shines every where a real undue appreciation of worldly things—most, of those things he is most bitter against— money and rank; and above all, a debasing sensitiveness to the opinion of those around us, apart from any regard for them and independently of any respect for their judgment. He reads as if he had a consciousness in himself of too great an appreciation of these things, against which his moral indignation is always in arms, and to which his honesty compels him to give expression; as if the bitterness of his jests were founded on that temper the poet speaks of—
                     “Out of that mood was born
                     Self-scorn, and then laughter at that self-scorn.”
Otherwise, by what strange distortion can a man of Mr. Thackeray's mind and heart have allowed himself to become absorbed in the contemplation of meanness and false shame and the world's low worship of mere worldly advantages? How can he have permitted so unpleasant a subject to grow on him till it has become the atmosphere of his thoughts? As Swift rakes in dirt, so Thackeray in meanness. He loves to anatomise its every form, to waylay and detect it at every corner, to turn it inside out, to descant on it, to conjugate it. He sees English society worshipping a golden and titled calf, and he angrily dashes down the image; but that is not enough; he grinds it to powder, and mingles it in every draught he gives us. We know there are these things in the world; but the question is, whether an author is well employed in constantly forcing them on our attention. All will agree that the less a man can be affected by them the better; we know these meannesses and basenesses are in our own natures; but the true way to deal with them is, looking upwards, to tread them under foot, not to go scraping about with our noses to the ground and taking credit for our humility and honesty when we lay them bare. They grow thick enough in our own soil and in our neighbours', if we choose to devote ourselves to the search. Any man will succeed in distorting and confusing his moral judgment, if he will but search long enough among his mixed motives to lay hold of the mean or selfish element, and do but give it attention enough when he has found it. Grant, if you will, that an element of self-interest mingles in all we do;
[Page 203]
are we likely to lose it by always looking for it? Is there any thing less edifying than Mr. Thackeray's way of showing up the meannesses and mixed motives of our neighbours, and then turning sharply on his readers, crying, “You're as bad, I'm as bad, we are none of us better than our neighbours; allow me to continue to excoriate them”? The remedy for these failings is not in exposing and railing at them. It is in raising men out of the atmosphere of them. The highest and the surest escape is the same we spoke of before, as transmuting life by a divine alchemy from barrenness, emptiness, and vanity into a harvest-field of rich opportunities and a battle-field for high ambition. Just in the degree in which a man's secret soul is occupied by a life at once within and outside this life will the small vexations of life and the pettinesses of others and even of himself fail to trouble him; the more he can absorb himself in a loftier pursuit, the more heedlessly will he brush through the nettles which Mr. Thackeray will have us sit down in to examine.
But apart from these considerations, any vivid interests powerful enough thoroughly to occupy a man suffice to set him free from this morbid and one-sided scrutiny of himself and his neighbours. But Mr. Thackeray not only narrows the field of life—he ignores the main avenues which, within the boundaries of the world he describes, are available as an escape both from an unhealthy sensitiveness to the meanness around us and within us, and from that burdening ever-presence of self under which almost all his characters labour.
Wide as is his knowledge of men, he seems to have little acquaintance with affairs. He paints men almost entirely in their moments of relaxation. He never describes a man carried out of himself by strong practical aims and interests. He is unwilling to recognise, seems scarcely to believe, that men ever have disinterested motives, or can be deeply occupied by other things than the demands of the feelings or the exigencies of gaining a livelihood. He laughs to scorn the idea that a man in writing, for instance, can have any higher object than to gain a money reward. He will have it that writing is a trade, and that all the writer can aspire to in the way of lofty aims is to write honestly, and without false exaggeration of sentiment or wilful distortion of fact. And on this latter point he speaks strongly and well, and with a vivid consciousness of some of an author's most immediate sources of temptation. It is true, perphas, that the art of letters has become unduly subservient to money gains, that even men of genius are apt to consider too closely not what their own conception of what is best and highest prompts them to, but what will tell best in securing a popular acceptance; and that they too often wait timidly and obsequiously on the public
[Page 204]
taste of the day. Yet this spirit is not so universal as Mr. Thackeray would have us think. Letters still leave a man free to be true to himself and his art, as well as to the ordinary exigencies of honesty. Even if they did not, there are plenty of other careers in which a man may forget himself in devotion to something beyond him. And in the case of the painter, indeed, Mr. Thackeray can see that while the artist labours for bread, his very choice of his profession as a means of making bread shows his love for it, and that as he who preaches the Gospel may justly live by it, the fact that he lives by his art is by no means inconsistent with a conscious devotion to its own high ends, or with his finding in a pure love for it the truest and most powerful source of his activity. There is a charming passage in the Newcomes which shows how fully Mr. Thackeray can enter when he chooses into the joys, the consolations, and the absorption of art:
“The painter turned as he spoke; and the bright northern light which fell upon the sitter's head was intercepted, and lighted up his own as he addressed us. Out of that bright light looked his pale thoughtful face and long locks and eager brown eyes. The palette on his arm was a great shield painted of many colours: he carried his maul-stick and a sheaf of brushes along with it, the weapons of his glorious but harmless war. With these he achieves conquests, wherein none are wounded save the envious: with that he shelters him against how much idleness, ambition, temptation! Occupied over that consoling work, idle thoughts cannot gain the mastery over him; selfish wishes or desires are kept at bay. Art is truth; and truth is religion; and its study and practice a daily work of pious duty. What are the world's struggles, brawls, successes, to that calm recluse pursuing his calling? See, twinkling in the darkness round his chamber, numberless beautiful trophies of the graceful victories which he has won,— sweet flowers of fancy reared by him,—kind shapes of beauty which he has devised and moulded. The world enters into the artist's studio, and scornfully bids him a price for his genius, or makes dull pretence to admire it. What know you of his art? You cannot read the alphabet of that sacred book, good old Thomas Newcome!”
As a rule, however, the author of Vanity Fair never represents a man as taken out of himself, except in some instances by the passions or the affections which approach nearest to instincts. He produces his characters on the stage generally only in their hours of idleness or amusement; and though he may indicate external occupation, he never (save, perhaps, in the sketch of J. J.) indicates an absorbing external interest. All his characters are self-engrossed, most of them self-seeking. Of Pendennis he tells us openly, “ours, as the reader has possibly already discovered, is a selfish story, and almost every person, according to his
[Page 205]
nature more or less generous than George, and according to the way of the world, as it seems to us, is occupied about Number One.” The occasion which calls out this expression of conviction indicates the source from which it springs. No man can set too high a value on the affections, but too exclusive a one he easily may; and this, as we have before indicated, is Mr. Thackeray's danger. He sees that the purest passion, the strongest personal friendship, and still more, the holy instinct of maternal love,— which he so admires and reverences that he seems to approach the subject on bended knee,—have mingled in their very essence a tincture of self; and finding it here, it seems easy to him to assume that no province of human life can possibly be free from it. Whereas, in fact, the affections are the strongholds of self-occupancy. Warm feelings, devoted instincts of attachment, are but a blessed gift from heaven, a part of the granted nature , and in their action simply the indulgence of a delightful emotion. Through the intellect and the will is a man's escape from self; thought and action are the conditions of self-forgetfulness; and love only loses its element of self in active service for the beloved object. Brooding over an attachment is the gratification of the highest pleasurable instinct granted to man; it is not conscious self-seeking, it is self-gratification; to labour for the sake of love is at once to escape from self, and the reverse of self-seeking. And as the highest virtues have the deepest temptations by their side, perhaps the most devout soul is the most in danger of a subtle spirit of self-occupancy, and most needs a field of active service; and on the other hand, the conditions of life offer the easiest escape from self-occupation in proportion as they lie farther from the domain of sentiment—science more than art, and active life more than science; and that pursuit offers the least temptation to selfishness which affords a man the widest and most absorbing sphere of exertion in the interest of others. Government is the employment which gives a man the least excuse for being self-occupied, though no doubt it may present him with formidable temptations to gratify what selfishness he has. In his want of interest in the active concerns of life, and in his emotional and artistic nature, are probably to be found the grounds of Mr. Thackeray's belief in the universality of self-occupation, which by a want of intellectual discrimination he confounds with self-seeking or selfishness.
Some of Mr. Thackeray's lesser works are infused throughout with a genial kindly spirit; such are the History of Mr. Samuel Titmarsh and the Great Hoggarty Diamond (which it is pleasant to hear is a favourite with the author), and the Kickleburys on the Rhine, Dr. Birch's School , &c. In these, foibles are pleasantly touched with cheerful happy raillery, and a light, gay,
[Page 206]
yet searching tone of ridicule, and a tender pleasing pathos, pervade the story: “the air nimbly and sweetly recommends itself;” the wit plays freshly and brightly, like the sun glittering through the green leaves on the wood-paths. But in the mass of his works the tendencies we have before spoken of give a dark and unpleasing ground to the whole picture; and on it he draws in strong black and white. His general view of English society is a very low and unrelieved one. It is a true but a strictly one-sided representation, selected partly for its amusing elements, partly from an unhappy idiosyncrasy of the author. An opposite picture might be drawn as flattering as this is satirical; and neither, of course, would be complete. On this stage move many figures fair and dark. The author's skill by no means forsakes him when he chooses to draw upon our love and admiration: Dobbin and Amelia, Warrington and Laura, and Helen; Lady Esmond, Colonel Newcome, and the sweet, placid, tear-worn, but somewhat shadowy image of Madame de Florac, rise up at once before the mind. But he puts such characters apart; they shine like glowworms, brightly, but with no influence in the surrounding darkness. They are in his world, but scarcely of it; they are never allowed to leaven his general conception of society. A lump of sugar here and there cannot soften the bitterness of the whole cake. It would be unjust, perhaps, to say that his genius is more at home in his darker portraitures; but they certainly gain an undue significance, if only from this, that they are always represented in their proper sphere of activity, where their whole cleverness and energy is brought into light, whereas his fairer characters are invariably those whose excellence consists in the goodness of their instincts and emotions, and, with the single exception of Colonel Esmond, no external field of any interest is found for them to occupy. It is unfortunate, too, that Mr. Thackeray finds the main sources of wit and amusement in the most close connection with some form of vice or wickedness. How often is his laughter spun out of baseness, and crime, and misery! Degrading selfishness, heathen worldliness, abandoned honour, broken oaths, dice, drunkenness, every form of viciousness but one are made the subjects of sparkling satire, witty jests, the universal charity of mockery, and scorn tempered by scepticism. The company of bad men and women in the world is not elevating. How can they be elevating made amusing in books? The “terrible death-chant of the contrite chimney-sweep,” in which Sam Hall conveys the lesson of his example, enforced by maledictions, has a grim humour about it true enough,—might almost be said to be a work of genius; but we don't take our daughters to hear it sung. Wickedness has its funny side; but it grates on our ears to hear English ladies talking as they do
[Page 207]
sometimes of “that charming wicked little Becky.” We don't say that a vicious or even a degraded nature is not a fit subject for the artist,—no doubt it is; we do not say it is an unfit subject even for comedy; but we do say it ought not to be comically treated. We do maintain that there is a sin against good taste and right moral influence in mingling too intimately real vice and the ridiculous; they may be alternated, but not mixed, still less almost chemically combined, after Mr. Thackeray's fashion. You sap the force of moral resentment when, by smiling raillery or farcical laughter, you make tolerable the stern realities of sin. We know no book with so repulsive a contrast between the broad farce, almost buffoonery, of its form, and the hideous and utterly unrelieved baseness and wickedness of its subject-matter, as is exhibited in the history of “Mr. Deuceace,” told in the characteristic orthography of “Jeames.” Mr. Thackeray has in his heart an eager hatred of baseness and hypocrisy. It bursts out unmistakably sometimes. It is hidden, no doubt, under all his air of persiflage; but it is part of his art to preserve a mask of neutrality; and an occasional protest has no weight against the tone of universal toleration, and the bantering mood which shakes these glittering sparks of wit out of the devil's devices. Sin is fire; and Mr. Thackeray makes fireworks of it.
And not only the witty emblazonment is bad, the elaborate detail is bad; and this applies not alone to the descriptions of the more serious vices, but to the lesser meannesses which we have before mentioned as occupying so undue a space of Mr. Thackeray's attention. It can be good for none of us to mingle so pleasantly and so closely with old Sir Pitt Crawley, with Becky, with old Osborne, with Major Pendennis, or even his nephew, with Costigan, with Altamont, with Blanche, with Lord Steyne, with many of those snobs. It is bad for us to be constantly rubbed against vice or sin of any kind; and we do not know whether the constant minutiæ of selfishness, of weakness, of false ambition, of cringing meanness and vulgarity, are not more harmful than the details of murder and other violent crime. Ainsworth and Thackeray differ in this respect only in the greater refinement and reconditeness of the latter. Why do we condemn the French school of novels? Because of the danger and debasement which lie in familiarising the ideas they contain. If we rightly think Richardson's Pamela unfit reading on account of its prurient minute details of a seduction, may we not protest against some portions of Mr. Thackeray's works which bring us so unintermittingly in contact with other degrading weaknesses of our nature, accompanied by something of a similar zest in the author, which has great power to infect the reader? On Richardson's subject, we should not, in the present day,
[Page 208]
tolerate such minuteness for an instant; on that matter we have an almost absurd apprehension of the dangers of infection. We not only avoid details, we shun the subject altogether: an author who means to be read must not come within a mile of it,—he must cripple his creations of character and his pictures of life in order to avoid it. Mr. Thackeray is fully aware of this; mere commercial self-preservation makes it necessary to hold aloof. But if the instinct which avoids familiarity with one particular form of vice and sinfulness be true, as we believe it to be, though overstrained, ought not the same instinct to apply in due proportion to other forms of vice and sinfulness?
It is no vindication of the dark tints of Mr. Thackeray's painting to say that base natures and low motives throng life itself, that it is not a Jenny and Jessamy world, and that we must all mix in it. The fact is, that a vast number of Mr. Thackeray's readers learn more of the soiled aspects of the world from his pages than from any experience of their own. And if it be said that these considerations would go too far in curtailing the range of art, we reply, that the author limits its range by the same considerations, but so as to incur a double evil; for while he cuts himself off from almost a whole side of human life in order to accommodate himself to modern taste and female readers, he certainly retains much which any but the world's standard of taste would willingly see excluded. Conventionally he is thoroughly unexceptionable. Practically his writings are too cramped for the indurated apprehensions of men who know the world; too tarnished for those who are unsophisticated, whether men, women, or children. A broad and lifelike picture of wickedness, even baseness, is not objected to. Iago and Blifil leave no stain on the mind; but incessant pottering over small meannesses bears the same relation to Shakespeare's and Fielding's treatment of this subject as, in another subject, Paul de Kock's novels do to Tom Jones . The most condensed illustration of this morbid tendency is republished from the Comic Almanac in the first volume of Mr. Thackeray's Miscellanies ,—the “Fatal Boots.” It is the cleverest piece of irony since Jonathan Wild , and perhaps the most subtle and complete delineation of an utterly base and selfish nature ever written. It is more painful and humiliating reading than Jonathan Wild ; because the greater crimes of the latter remove him further from us, and because he is distinguished by some power of intellect and force of character utterly denied to the abject Stubbs, whose autobiography reads like the smell of bad cabbages.
It is the evil of all satire, that it depends for its force upon a minute and vivid delineation of faults and vices which it never is advantageous to drag into light. Its only useful sphere is
[Page 209]
personality. It is not often that personal satire is defensible; but in that, or the near approaches to it, is the only practical and possibly advantageous exercise of the art. You can make one man feel the lash, and direct a storm of indignation against him which may punish him or terrify him into a new course. And so it is possible to attack effectively a small class, or an opinion or course of action, which admits of practical change or abandonment. You may satirise General Simpson or the Times , and possibly produce an effect, though it is not probable; you may satirise the Palace Court, the peace-party, or the conduct of the war, and it may be with a result: but you cannot scourge abstract vices; you cannot hope to be practically employed when you satirise hypocrisy, or mammon-worship, or false adulation of rank, or the worldly estimate of temporal advantages which results in wretched marriages or selfish singleness. For one who learns from Mr. Thackeray to amend a folly of his own, how many will gain a sharper insight into those of their friends! And to none of our tendencies does Mr. Thackeray minister so effectively as to this. His social satire is fair and honest, “strikes no foul blow,” as he himself says of it; but it is so searching, so minute, deals with such real incident of every-day occurrence, that it forms a sort of public gossip. It is a treasury of general observation, out of which to make particular applications. It gives us an insight we never had before into the weaknesses of our neighbours, makes us rich in new sources of contempt, and indicates clearly the channels of false shame. We can test our friends' daily life by it, and cry, “Isn't that like Mrs. Kewsy?” and “The very way the Portmans go on.”
As a set-off against these unpleasing elements in Mr. Thackeray's writings, there is one whole side of his genius which casts a pure and pleasant sunshine over his pages. He has a heart as deep and kind as ever wrote itself in fiction. His feelings are warm and impetuous, his nature honest, truthful, honourable. Against cruelty, against baseness, against treachery, his indignation flames out quick and sudden, like a scorching fire. With what is manly, frank, and noble, he has a native inborn sympathy. If his sense of the ludicrous, and his wit, are too often nourished upon wickedness and depravity, he is familiar with another and truer connection, and has an exquisite felicity and moving power in the mingling of humour and pathos. If his works as a whole want purpose and depth, and clearness of moral conviction, if they accept sin simply as part of what is, instead of as a departure from what should be, yet they preach throughout lessons of example more telling than precept, and enclose many and many a passage well fitted to stir the spirit and to move the heart. If his wicked and mean creations are too predominant
[Page 210]
and too detailed, he has some at least whose great goodness and white purity relieve by fair gleams the dark and clouded landscape. They are emotional characters: but are not these the very ones which practically take the strongest hold on our affections; and the errors of impulse those which, however long the preacher may preach, we shall always the most readily excuse? Who ever painted a manly generous boy with so free and loving a pencil as the author of Dr. Birch's School , of Champion Major, and of young Clive Newcome? Who else has that fine touch that can picture us so delicately and so clearly the fresh innocence of girlhood, the tender passion of a loving woman, or the absorbing devotion of a mother? Who can trace in firmer strokes fidelity and courage and temperate endurance in a man? In every page, alternating with bitterness, and sometimes an unsparing cruelty of sarcasm, there shines out a kindly affectionate nature, soft compassion, and humble reverence. It is as if his nature, like his writings, were full of strongly-contrasted elements, lying closely side by side. Whatever his defects,—and they are great,—he must always take his stand as one of the masters of English fiction; inferior to Fielding, because he wants his breadth and range, the freeness of his air, and the soundness of his moral healthfulness; but his rival in accuracy of insight and vigour of imagination; and perhaps, as we have before said, more than his rival in fertility. And since Fielding's time, though characters have been drawn more complete than any one of Mr. Thackeray's, no fiction has been written in the school to which his imagination belongs which can bear a moment's comparison with Vanity Fair . This is hitherto his masterpiece, and will probably always remain so. There is a vis in it greater than in any of his other works—the lines are more sharply, deeply cut, the whole more marked with the signs of special and peculiar genius. Our pleasure in it alternates vividly with dislike—almost repulsion; but our admiration is compelled by all parts of it, and our eagerest sympathy by some. Dobbin and Amelia will always remain living inmates of the English mind. They have both of them, Amelia especially, had much injustice done them by their author; but as their images lie longer in our breasts, and we meditate upon them, the sneers and inuendoes fade away, and we see them undefaced, and recognise that Dobbin's devotion was not selfishness, and Amelia's characteristic tenderness not weakness. Just as with living people small obscurations and accidents fall away, and we estimate the whole character better in absence, so it is with these: we know them better, and love them more trustfully in memory than on the actual page. Thackeray's genius is in many respects not unlike that of Goethe; and such
[Page 211]
another woman as Amelia has not been drawn since Margaret in Faust .
Of his other great works, Pendennis is the richest in character and incident, and the least pleasing; the Newcomes the most humane, but less vigorous and concentrated than any of the others; Esmond —the later parts at least—by far the best and noblest. We have no temptation to discuss the merits of its imitative style and scenery, observing only that though a modern mind shines through the external coat, yet probably no other man could have gathered so many minute and characteristic indicia of the times of which he writes, and so artfully have blended them together. It is as a tale we look at it; and though to most men such a subject, so treated, would have afforded more than ordinary temptations to an overloading of character with costume and external detail, with Mr. Thackeray the reverse is the case. He is freed from his devotion to the petty satire of modern conventions, and has fewer calls for the exercise of small contempts. The main characters, Esmond, his mistress, and Beatrix, are the ablest he has drawn; they are not less vivid than his others, and more complete. Esmond is strong, vigorous, noble, finely executed as well as conceived, and his weakness springs from the strength of a generous and impulsive nature. He is no exception to the observation that Mr. Thackeray never endows a hero with principles of action. Esmond is true to persons, not to ideas of right or duty. His virtue is fidelity, not conscientiousness. Beatrix is perhaps the finest picture of splendid, lustrous, physical beauty ever given to the world. It shines down every woman that poet or painter ever drew. Helen of Greece,
                                         “Fairer than the evening air
Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars,”
is the only one who approaches her. And both her character and that of her mother are master-pieces of poetical insight; the latter blemished, however, here and there with the author's unconquerable hankering to lay his finger on a blot. He must search it out, and give it at least its due blackness. He will not leave you to gather that it must be there,—he parades it to the day, and presses it to your reluctant eyes. It comes partly from the truthfulness of his nature, which cannot bear that a weakness should be concealed, and partly probably from a mistaken apprehension of the truth that the artist must be true to nature. There was a time when a good deal of parade was made and some very diluted philosophy spun out of the distinction between “the true” and “the real.” But this simple fact there is, that a man may be true to nature and yet depart from all her manifested
[Page 212]
forms; and that it is a higher striving to be faithful to such an inborn conception than to mutilate and distort it for the sake of finding room in it for certain observed facts. Mr. Thackeray sometimes does this, oftener he does what is quite as unpleasing. When in a character, especially a woman's, he comes upon a defect, he does not allow it to speak itself, or show itself naturally, and sink with its own proper significance into the reader's mind. He rushes in as author, seizes on it, and holds it up with sadness or triumph: “See,” he says, “this is what you find in the best women.” Thus he gives it an undue importance and vividness, and troubles and distorts the true impression of the whole character.
In the same spirit he lays hold of the petty dishonesties and shams of social life. Almost all these have their origin in vanity, and in its hasty and habitual gratification the meanness of the devices is overlooked, at any rate not often wilfully adopted with a consciousness of its presence. Such contrivances are follies of a bad kind; but to stigmatise them as deliberate hypocrisies is to give a very false significance to the worst ingredient in them.
In the Newcomes “the elements are kindlier mixed” than in any of the other fictions; there is a great softening of tone, a larger predominance is given to feeling over sarcasm. As before, the book is a transcript from life; but the life is more pleasantly selected, and the baser ingredients not scattered with so lavish a hand. If the execution be somewhat inferior, as perhaps it is, the characters of Clive and Ethel less clearly and vividly defined than we have by long use to high excellence begun to think we have a right to expect they should be, and the former unattractive in his feebleness, if the journey through the story be rather langweilig , sometimes from over-detail, sometimes from long and superficial moralisings over the sins of society,—yet there is much to reconcile us to these shortcomings in exchange, in some greater respite from the accustomed sneer. We have said before that the genius of Thackeray has many analogies to that of Goethe. He is like him, not only in his mode of depicting characters as they live, instead of reproducing their depths and entirety from the conception of a penetrative imagination, but also in his patient and tolerant acceptance of all existing phenomena, and his shrinking not merely from moral judgment but from moral estimate. The avoidance of the former, springs in Thackeray from kindly feeling, from the just and humble sense we all should have that our own demerits make it unseemly for us to ascend the judgment-chair, and from a wide appreciation of the variety and obscurity of men's real motives of action; the latter, a very different thing, springs from this same wide insight,
[Page 213]
which makes the task more than ordinarily difficult, especially to an intellect not framed to take pleasure in general conclusions, and from his imagination being one which does not naturally conceive in separate wholes, and most of all from an insufficient sense of the duty incumbent on us all to form determinate estimates of the characters and moral incidents around us, if only to form the landmarks and bearings for our own conduct in life. These features remain in the Newcomes . There is the same want of ballasting thought, the same see-saw between cynicism and sentiment, the same suspension of moral judgment. The indignant impulse prompts the lash, and the hand at once delivers it; while the mind hangs back, doubts its justice, and sums up after execution with an appeal to our charity on the score of the undecipherable motives of human action, the heart's universal power of self-deception, and the urgency of fate and circumstance.
$$$
