Walsingham (1797)
Author: Robinson, Mary.
Publication info: Walsingham . 4 v. London: Printed for T. N. Longman, 1797.

Walsingham; or The Pupil of Nature. A Domestic Story. By Mary Robinson, Author of Angelina— Hubert De Sevrac— ... In Four Volumes.
[Page ]
VOL. I.
[Page ]
LETTER I. To the Reverend Arthur Ainsforth. Aix la Chapelle, Nov. 1791.
You tell me to bear my misfortunes with resignation; a parent counsels an ill-fated son and he has not resolution to obey him. The magnitude of my sorrow overwhelms the faculties of reason; I cannot reflect on the past without agony: I have no prospect before me, but irremediable despair.
I often think that I could, with fortitude, have borne any other calamity;
[Page 2]
that I could have resisted the fiercest torrents of oppressions struggled with all the tortures of corporeal suffering; and bowed with resignation to the worst sorrows of adversity. Is it vanity, or want of self knowledge that misleads me?— Both. Yet I am ashamed of the yielding despondency which enervates my mind, at the same moment that I feel incapable of resisting its approaches.
What is philosophy? What is that vaunted stoicism which experience pretends to inculcate and wisdom essays to practise? Can it teach the tortured imagination to conjure up chimeras, whose potent skill shall lull it into apathy? Can it instruct the soul to contemn the taunts of conscience? Can it check the tear which nature impels to flow? Or has it the magical power to bid the throbbings of memory subside, while the fountain I of the heart is yet warmed by circulation? If philosophy
[Page 3]
cannot enable us to brave the miseries of feeling, as well as the vicissitudes of fortune, what is it but an airy shield, mocking the vanity of human fortitude, and decorating that breast which it has not power to render invulnerable?
Why was I thrown upon the vast and troubled world, without hope, and at an age when the mind, like the tender branch, bends to the rude touch of the pitiless assailant? Why was I taught to experience the anguish of regret, before my mental faculties were strong in reason, and rendered capable of combating the vicissitudes of fortune? I was born to sorrow; I was nursed with tears: solitude was the silent cherisher of affliction; and I rushed into the busy world trembling, fearful, suspicious, and disgusted: prejudice my companion, and wounded pride the inmate of my bosom. From such a being what could be expected? The elastic nerve which conveys energy to
[Page 4]
the human heart, was strained by persecution till its powers of action were nearly annihilated.—I shrunk, I yielded, before I had learnt to exercise the virtue of resistance.
Yet, O Truth! divine and immutable Truth! thou hast been my guide, my monitor, when the lucid moment of reason triumphed over the dark and gloomy passions: thou hast wrung my soul to agony, when I beheld the horrid retrospect; where hatred, pride, revenge, and madness moved on in terrible succession! Yet I have studied thy precepts; I have practised them; hard task for one born to dependence! unwelcome associate for him whom destiny has led through the devious paths of folly and dissimulation; one hour pelted by the storms of fortune, and the next dazzled by hopes that never can be realized. Why I have endured my miseries and tamely lived, day after day, sickening in one dull round of
[Page 5]
sorrow, needs no explanation: you are not a stranger to the sombre progress of my sufferings; you will shortly, very shortly, witness their termination: fortitude is exhausted: a perpetual warfare between the passions of the soul and the energies of reason has debilitated the latter, while the former grow into vigour, and riot over the subservient senses with unabating violence.
There is an evil power which attends the actions of some men, so undefinable, so like the potent hand of destiny, that resistance is baffled by the despair to vanquish; and they yield to its influence merely because it has hitherto been triumphant: that power has long assailed me: I sought to oppose, I endeavoured to destroy it: a combat, fierce and determined, has not diminished its strength, though it has left my mind feeble and exhausted: I yield, from the dreadful conviction that— I must perish.
[Page 6]
You counsel me to divert my mind, to resist the fatigue of incessant rumination: if I abjure the exercise of thought, what is to be its substitute? Am I to waste a few remaining days in trivial dissipation? or to grow torpid in the perpetual spells of habitual apathy? Is not annihilation preferable to such resources? Can the mere powers of respiration be termed life, while the fibres of the heart are benumbed by a cold and creeping languor? I shudder, I shrink from inanity! Why should I inhabit a speck in this busy sphere when I cease to act my part, to exercise my mental strength, to benefit mankind, and to dignify my nature.
You know that my misfortune is not to be meliorated, all the vaunted resolution of man cannot reverse the dark unerring mirror, which shews me what I am! Ignorance might have veiled the gloomy colour of those features, which
[Page 7]
knowledge has, too late, instructed me to contemplate. Were my griefs remediable, I might, by progressive efforts, subdue their magnitude; but they are the hydra assailants which revolve with every hour; time sicknes as they pass, while the perspective which they leave behind only vanishes to return again with accumulated horrors!
I am the child of sorrow, the victim of deception. I have been culpable, but not vicious; resentful, but not vindictive. Mine have been the errors of a too vivid imagination; the miseries of sensibility, acute, but not indiscriminate. It is not from the multitude that I derive my anguish; the senseless throng, and the gaudy ephemera of prosperous days, never had power to sting me—for they were not my associates! Cold and cheerless sorrow has been my companion; and the shaft which pierced my bosom
[Page 8]
was winged by a resistless hand—the hand of nature.
Since my residence on the continent, I have endeavoured to mingle with society; I am sorlorn, but not misanthropic; dejected, but not splenetic: there is an infinite difference between the uncomplaining sadness of despondency and the peevish inquietude of a capricious imagination. What are the sensations I excite? Curiosity and pity. Pity! that miserable boon which humanity bestows in silence, but which ostentation delights in displaying; while all the proud indignant throbbings of the wounded heart unite to repulse the arrogant intruder. If there be a pang more terrible than death, a poison more subtle than the destructive aconite, a humiliation more poignant than contempt, or a torture more acute than the sting of ingratitude, it is the agonising taunt which mocks
[Page 9]
philanthropy, the pity of the cold and ostentatious bosom.
If I sometimes steal from the social scenes of life, it is owing to my dread of diffusing a gloom over the aspect of surrounding objects: the pale and sickly hue of melancholy must be obtrusive where all else is vivid, animated, glowing! I feel, yes, I feel that I am fit only for myself!
Your letter of introduction has procured for me the attentions of Mr. Harland and his amiable family. Rosanna is a being of the very first order! Sensible, ingenuous, and unaffected.— There is a pleasing pensiveness in her manner, which acts in unison with the present temper of my mind, and by congeniality of sentiment, alleviates that which never can be wholly cured. Oh, Memory! busy, barbarous demon! restless, inexorable tormentor! when wilt
[Page 10]
thou let me steal a moment from myself and thee?—Never!
Farewell! Heaven bless you!
WALSINGHAM AINSFORTH.
LETTER II. Mrs. Harland to Arthur Ainsforth. 4th Dec. 1791.
You desired me, my dear sir, to receive and to console your son; the feeling heart shrinks not when merit and affliction unite to claim its sympathies, its affections: I lament that Mr. Ainsforth's state of mind requires the assiduities of either.
Since his arrival in Germany, his dejection of mind has rather augmented than decreased. His senses seem tinctured
[Page 11]
with that poisonous melancholy which, I fear, neither time nor society will have power to remove. What is to be done? Such a being must not be lost: I know not how to solace his despair; and I tremble while I anticipate the termination of his sorrows.
When I behold the ill-fated Walsingham, I am almost induced to indulge that scepticism which would dispute the justice of Heaven. Gifted with all the graces of nature, young, enlightened, amiable, and humane, punctilious in honour, polished in manners, generous almost to prodigality, and brave even to romantic enthusiasm; yet perfecuted with a rigour unexampled, and bowed even to the grave by sorrow! Are these the rewards of virtue?
You say that he is the victim of deception; is it possible that a mind so cultivated should turn from that reason and that philosophy which present their united
[Page 12]
powers of resistance. It cannot be: checked in the warm pursuits of youthful animation, a temporary gloom may darken his present prospects, but the mist will fade before the eye of resignation, and he will be tranquil, if not happy.
Mr. Ainsforth sets out to-morrow for Luxemburg; he talks of important business which demands his attention; we are only anxious to sooth his afflictions; to interrogate, would be to irritate their poignancy. I dare not question him on the subject of his journey; the griefs of such a sufferer, while they wring his bosom, are its surest safeguards against the touch of persecution. To-morrow I will conclude my letter.
5th Dec. 1791.
Half an hour only has elapsed since Mr. Ainsforth's departure. He has left us, lamenting his absence and adoring
[Page 13]
his virtues! His last words saultered on his lips, and he trembled as he bade us farewell. The mystery which envelopes his sorrows, diffuses over them an accumulated shade that makes conjecture painful: whatever the cause may be, the bosom which would not participate in its effect must indeed be torpid. Adieu.
JEMIMA HARLAND.
LETTER III. Rosanna to Walsingham. 6th January 1792.
A Month has passed since you left us, and yet we have received no tidings of you! The interest which I take in your happiness or misery will not suffer me to remain silent any longer. The cold
[Page 14]
fastidious bosom may condemn me; but while I feel self-acquitted, I dare look beyond the censure of the ignorant, and own, that your virtues and your misfortunes demand my admiration and my tears.
Ten short weeks have animated my bosom with all the proudest energies of friendship. I am not apt to form opinions hastily, and I know that attachments which are not founded on the firm basis of reason, are seldom permanent: yet, I can venture to esteem you, though scarcely known; nay more, dare tell you so; and the purity of my heart feels no diminution while I make the avowal.
I have, of late, passed all my hours in your society; I have accompanied you in your walks; I have endeavoured to share your inquietude; to read your thoughts, and to divert them from their strong propensity to sadness. I have watched the struggling emotions that
[Page 15]
perpetually preyed upon your heart: I have marked the involuntary tear rushing to your eyes, and trembled when your pale quivering lip betrayed the anguish of your bosom. Yet, I have never attempted to disturb the sacred silence of sorrow; I have never breathed a wish that could scrutinize beyond the spontaneous confidence of esteem and friendship.
You are now estranged from me; you are wandering, alone; perhaps vainly endeavouring to overtake the flattering phantom, hope; or, what is far more painful, cherishing in your bosom the scorpions of despair. Oh, Walsingham! whither will your sorrows lead you? In what lonely corner of the habitable globe would you seek an asylum? Can the dark and noiseless solitudes of Ardenne, afford a sweeter solace than the tear of sympathy; a more tranquil shelter than the habitation of virtue?
[Page 16]
Return; accept the assiduities of friendship, the consolations of reason:—look forward to happier days, when the stormy passions shall own the magic of reflection; subdue the restless demon that destroys you; call to your aid the pride of virtue, the consciousness of truth, the dignity of reason. The hour of mental triumph will arrive; for time will not strew perpetual thorns on the bosom of sensibility, without some flowers to hide the wounds which they occasion.
As soon as your carriage was out of fight on the day of your departure, I hastened to the library, where we had passed the preceding evening. Every object is dear, which reminds the feeling heart of past felicity; and there are even melancholy pleasures, which sometimes charm, more than the strongest fascinations of delight. On entering the scene of our frequent studies, my steps for some minutes were arrested, by a sensation,
[Page 17]
which seemed undescribable: it was mournful, but not unpleasing;—it awakened all my regrets; a tear stole down my cheek;—it was a tribute to the memory of past happiness, and I could not repel it.
The chairs which we had occupied, till midnight, still remained near the table. The books which you had turned over, for you were too unquiet to be constant in your studies, presented an interesting confusion, which seemed the epitome of your mind. The volume which had concluded our researches, lay where you had thrown it; the leaf was folded down;—with a trembling hand I opened it, and read, Ecris-moi cependent; ecris-moi tout ce que ton cœur ressent encore; que j'unisse mes douleurs aux tiennes, et que je rende soupirs pour soupirs 1 . I recollected your having
[Page 18]
pointed out the passage;—I shuddered! I lamented your departure with a new sensation of fear and regret, and would have given worlds, had I possessed them, once more to have recalled you. Wherefore should I confess my folly? Yet, if you do not applaud the ingenuousness of my heart, you will perhaps smile at its weakness; and should even my tears, my anxieties, irradiate your countenance but for a moment, I shall remember, with a mournful satisfaction, the sensation which produced them.
Walsingham, adieu! If your sorrows can find alleviation in silence, still keep them sacred,—and allow me only to lament, that they are of a nature which requires concealment; but, if I can participate in your grief, I charge you to be explicit.
ROSANNA.
[Page 19]
LETTER IV. Walsingham to Rosanna. Luxemburg, Feb, 1792.
The rash mortal, who in this world of anguish voluntarily relinquishes a source of consolation, must be either a maniac or a misanthropist. What then will you denominate one, who has flown from your society, to wither in a dark and cheerless solitude, where hope is a stranger, and where memory will corrode the heart, till the powers of sensation are annihilated?
You have often questioned me, why I shrink from the solace of congenial minds: why I court the gloom which feeds my sorrow, and cherish in my breast the anguish that will destroy me? I will briefly answer you: 'tis fit that I should suffer.
[Page 20]
The packet which accompanies this letter will unfold the mystery of my misfortunes: I confide them to your gentle bosom, with various papers which form parts of the narrative. The events attending the earliest hours of my life were, at different periods, communicated by those who witnessed the progress of my destiny: it will perhaps remain for you to be my future historian.
Amiable Rosanna! something like compunction strikes upon my heart, while I anticipate your sensations at the disclosure of my disastrous story: you have commanded—I must obey; and, whatever my fate may be, it will be my last and only solace, that, in this world of persecution, I found one pure and generous bosom which throbbed in unison with mine; which participated in my griefs; lamented my frailties; and promised, by all the sensibilities of virtue, to shed a tear on the grave that shall conceal them.
[Page 21]
CHAPTER I. The dawning hours of my life were marked by such gloomy prospects, that I will begin my story with the origin of my misfortunes. As it is to the events of my childhood that I owe those indelible prejudices which have attended me, from hour to hour, each darker than the former, I will not omit the slightest incident that may serve to prove, how strongly the earliest impressions take hold on the senses; and how powerfully they influence the mind, during our weary journey of existence.
I was born in a small village on the borders of South Wales: my father was a poor curate; my mother the descendant of an ancient, but ill-fated family: she was a great-grand daughter of Sir Sidney Waller, a gallant general,
[Page 22]
who lost his life on the same day and in the same cause as the immortal Hampden. From that memorable epoch the name had gradually sunk into decay, till the parent of my mother was reduced to the humble occupation of a country schoolmaster.
Mr. Waller, in whose breast the pride of independence glowed, even when affliction wrung it in every fibre, no longer able to support an empty title, proved his wisdom by relinquishing that which could not add consequence to virtue; though in the abode of adversity it might have exposed him to ridicule and contempt.
My grandfather was a man of profound erudition; illustrious in mind, and philanthropic in all the sensations of the heart! He laboured with the resignation of virtue, and even his poverty was dignified by an elevation of soul, that mocked the pageantry of exterior greatness.
[Page 23]
Retired, amidst the solitude of mountains, and only known in the abodes of those who had scarcely dicrimination to estimate his worth, his patient toil was never interrupted by an expression of discontent, while he experienced no pleasure like that of cultivating truth, and exemplifying virtue.
My mother, who was but sparingly gifted with personal graces, was amply endowed with every mental perfection. She was not the only offspring of Mr. Waller; he had another daughter, one year younger, beautiful as nature, and ambitious as beautiful: her name was Frances, my mother's Penelope. They were the joy of their father's bosom; the solace of his cares; he educated them with unremitting attention; he laboured to support them, (for their mother died when they were too young to be sensible of their loss,) and his last moments were embittered by the reflection, that his
[Page 24]
children would be left portionless and unprotected.
On the death of Mr. Waller, his daughters, the eldest then only sixteen years of age, became the objects of universal pity and admiration. The fame of their father, at length, reached the neighbouring county, and every heart commiserated their misfortunes. Among the many who offered them an asylum, Lady Aubrey was the most zealous: she was a widow, rich, haughty, and ostentatious: the sisters were highly accomplished; their patroness wanted society in the lonely manor-house of Glenowen, and, a short time after my grandfather's death, the disconsolate orphans repaired to their new habitation.
The change in their prospects seemed to promise every felicity, when time should obliterate their deep impression of sorrow for the loss of such a parent. But they were not conscious of the
[Page 25]
anguish which originates in dependence, neither did they know the vast difference between a fond father's love and a proud woman's ostentation. Frances was constantly employed in reading, working furniture for the ancient apartments at Glenowen, and visiting such of the neighbours as Lady Aubrey's pride condescended to acknowledge; while Penelope was engaged in a series of humbler occupations: it was her task to superintend the household, to distribute the scanty pittance, which blazoned the name of her protectress more than it cheered the hearts of the afflicted; to preside over the dairy, and to regulate the book of family accounts.
Sir Edward Aubrey, the son and heir of the deceased baronet, had been educated at Glenowen:—left at the age of ten years to the care of his mother, he had been the ruler of his family, and the
[Page 26]
terror of the country. Violent, bold, overbearing, and ignorant, he was the little tyrant of the mountains: time did not polish the rude work of nature, but, in proportion as he became conscious of power, he dealt, with a merciless hand, every species of oppression.
It was the fate of Frances Waller to awaken the only tender sentiment that ever honoured the bosom of Sir Edward; and, a short time after she became the inmate of Glenowen, they were married: while the more homely but amiable Penelope was consigned to the sober affections of Arthur Ainsforth, Lady Aubrey's domestic chaplain.
This union of my parents was the cause of many pangs and heart-burnings in the domestic circle of Glenowen; for, Mr. Ainsforth, by the meekness and piety of his doctrines, had made an indelible impression on the heart of Mrs.
[Page 27]
Judith Blagden, Lady Aubrey's waiting woman, a person who will act a principal part in my eventful history.
My father, whose attachment was pure and ardent, received the hand of Penelope with gratitude and affection. He not only knew how to appreciate her mental qualifications, but assiduously embraced every opportunity of affording them additional cultivation. My mother was prudent, studious, meek, and indefatigable in her researches after knowledge; an able scrutinizer of the human heart, and a correct commentator on whatever she thought worthy of observation. Among the peasantry in the vicinity of Glenowen,she was considered as the oracle of truth, while all her days were devoted to the graceful task of inculcating moral virtue.
The beautiful Frances was in very few instances the resemblance of my mother: vanity was her predominant
[Page 28]
failing, though ambition and a love of wealth often struggled for pre-eminence. She had ever been volatile, trifling, and capricious; to see and to be seen, to triumph and to reign over every contemporary, were her first, and most indefatigable pursuits; and so prepossessing are the graces of form and feature, that from every little circle she bore away the palm of victory, while the mild, intelligent, and unassuming Penelope was often scarcely noticed.
Sir Edward Aubrey was rather robust than handsome; his manners were coarse, without that blunt sincerity which is often the associate of an ingenuous and noble nature. He could swear, drink, and follow the hounds, with any man in his county: boisterously gay when sober; and peevishly arrogant when intoxication gave him courage to assert his opinions. His wealth was almost countless, owing to its vast accumulation
[Page 29]
during his minority, and his mother's disposition, which was penurious, even to a vice. Such was the husband of the beautiful, the vain, the young and ambitious Frances.
Two years after Sir Edward's marriage, the dowager Lady Aubrey expired in a fit of apoplexy, and, as her son's emancipation from the mountains which nearly encircled the manor-house had been retarded by her parsimonious counsels, her remains were scarcely deposited in the family vault, when a journey to the metropolis was meditated, and resolved on. Frances was delighted with the prospect of emerging from obscurity, and her heart palpitated with the anticipation of triumphs, to which she had hitherto been a stranger.
From the moment that the expedition was first mentioned, all her ideas seemed to expand. The manor-house appeared more gloomy than ever; the
[Page 30]
mountains assumed, to the eye of fancy, a more stupendous and barren appearance; while she considered herself as a star, too long obscured in the mist of oblivion, and at last destined to illumine the world of splendour and animation.
My mother bade adieu to Lady Aubrey, with a painful reluctance, which superstition would have converted into a presentiment of future events:—she knew that the affections of the heart had no share in the motives which united her to Sir Edward; and she trembled while reason presented the infinity of dangers which she was destined to encounter. Young, handsome, lively, and inconsiderate; reared in the calm seclusion of humble solitude, accustomed to flattery, fond of pleasure, and habituated to sway, in the narrow limits of rustic society, her peril was imminent: Penelope saw it; and her gentle bosom ached with apprehension.
[Page 31]
The separation which occasioned so much pain to my mother was scarcely felt by Lady Aubrey; she had other events of more importance to occupy her mind; her very dreams were replete with anticipated delights; splendour, dissipation, and conquest embellished every scene which was presented by her exhilarated fancy, while the purest affections of the heart were subdued by the ardour of ambition. A cold embrace absorbed the tear of regret which glistened on my mother's cheek, and the giddy Frances departed from Glenowen, almost overpowered with joy and expectation.
On Sir Edward's arrival in London, a magnificent house was hired for his winter residence. Lady Aubrey was presented at court; her beauty rendered her conspicuous, her splendours were the subject of universal conversation. She darted forth, in the sphere of gaiety, like
[Page 32]
an effulgent orb, eclipsing every lesser object, and enlivening the scenes around her by an unexampled brilliancy. She exhibited her love of profusion, by the richness of her liveries, the number of her carriages, the value of her jewels, and the luxuries of her table. Lady Aubrey's mansion was the abode of the graces; Lady Aubrey's assemblies were the rendezvous of taste and fashion; Lady Aubrey's beauty was blazoned in every diurnal publication; her portrait embellished the gallery of every painter; the forms, and even the colours of female decorations were named after her; while her matrimonial appendage was as little known, and as little talked of, as though he had inhabited the wilds of Arabia. Days flew like moments; every man was the adorer of Lady Aubrey; every woman was the friend: her house was the temple of intrigue; and her companions the votaries of dissipation.
[Page 33]
It has been said, that the frost of avarice, if once permitted to thaw, overwhelms all the barriers of prudence and consistency. The fortune which Sir Edward's mother had hoarded with indefatigable parsimony was scarcely sufficient to supply the prodigality of her successor: and even the little which her ostentation bestowed among the mountains of Glenowen, was withheld by the weary hand of profusion, or indiscriminately lavished on fools and sharpers, in the circles of fashion, or the vortex of the gaming table. Charity was a cold and cheerless counsellor, who pointed towards the dark abodes of poverty, where modest merit pined in obscurity; while pleasure led her thoughtless pupil to scenes replete with splendours; where fortune smiled on the vicious, and infamy concealed her features, beneath the specious mask of reputation. Too refined to be reasonable, too lovely to be
[Page 34]
wife, too wealthy to be suspected, and too giddy to be admonished, the beautiful Frances commenced her career, with an eclat unprecedented; while all the despicable herd of knaves and flatterers, who live upon the follies of their patrons, thronged to that polluted temple, which presented her as its supreme idol.
Sir Edward had few opportunities of conversing with Lady Aubrey, and the short intervals which the multiplicity of her occupations allowed him were generally productive of spleen and altercation. The system of œeconomy which had been invariably adopted by Sir Edward's mother, served, by contrast, to render his wife's extravagance doubly conspicuous: but he was told that a fashionable husband had no right to govern; that a woman of spirit could not tamely submit to the goading trammels of matrimonial tyranny. Examples were set before him, wherein the lord of
[Page 35]
the creation was nothing more than a passive, convenient, domestic animal, whose only merit was complacency, and whose unremitting task was the study of obedience: even the splendid habitation which Sir Edward's munificence provided was not allowed the sanction of his name; while Lady Aubrey's sovereignty was universally acknowledged.
At the moment when the high tide of prodigality threatened to overleap the boundaries of reason, Sir Edward's health began visibly to decline: pent up in the unwholesome atmosphere of the metropolis; deprived of that species of exercise which was natural to his constitution; devoting every vacant minute to the bottle, and condemned to reverse the accustomed hours of rest; his temper became irritable, his mind enervated, his language querulous, and his pursuits uninteresting: spleen engendered disgust; indifference, contempt; till a decided
[Page 36]
hatred embittered every moment of existence.
Sir Edward's ill-humour and uncouth manners afforded an inexhaustible source for ridicule to the sarcastic associates of Lady Aubrey, whose mind was but too readily prepared to receive an unfavourable impression. The malevolent industry of her female friends, was indefatigable in promoting domestic uneasiness; they envied the luxury which they participated, and still more, the reputation which, amidst all the temptations of fashionable life, and all the pernicious examples before her, Lady Aubrey had still preserved unblemished: this preeminence was not to be supported: the insolence of virtue was too formidable to be tolerated by those, who had abjured its dominion; and a mighty phalanx conspired at once to annihilate her fame, fortune, and domestic happiness.
[Page 37]
With a mind poisoned by the evil insinuations of artful counsellors, Lady Aubrey lamented her hasty marriage; and did not hesitate to believe, that had she been permitted to emerge from obscurity, she might have formed an alliance among the highest orders of society. She beheld many instances of the caprice of fortune; many brows, decorated with the ermine of nobility, which were wrinkled with age, and marked with insignificance: she saw women, who had outlived the memory of their juvenile follies, assuming all the dignity of virtue; and, equally forgetful of their origin and their indiscretions, arrogating to themselves the most insolent superiority. The disgust, which was the offspring of disappointment, wholly obliterated those impressions of gratitude, which reflection should have rendered indelible, and Lady Aubrey, at the very moment when she was envied by all the
[Page 38]
world, would, with delight, have flown from it for ever. Thus weary of every object which presented itself, in the gaudy routine of prodigality, she looked in vain for consolation; flattery poured its poison into her mind, while the phantom of domestic happiness became every hour more faint, till it faded into nothing. At all public places of entertainment Lady Aubrey was still the planet, round which the lesser constellations moved incessantly, borrowing a reflected light from her superior splendour; all of real bliss gradually vanished; while the deceptive blandishments of false consequence, augmented, in proportion as her judgment became inert, till the gay and giddy Frances shrunk into one of those trifling mortals, who cherish existence, long after they become incapable of appreciating its value.
[Page 39]
CHAP. II. Sir Edward's health rapidly declined as Lady Aubrey's intercourse with folly augmented. Her inattention kept pace with his irascibility, till at last, unable to bear either her insolence or neglect, she was peremptorily commanded to quit the metropolis. Frances had long been weary of every surrounding object, (for even the most delightful scenes produce satiety,) and would have become a voluntary recluse, had it not been the will of her husband that she should be dissipated no longer. She had been taught to resist every species of oppression, and the idea of yielding to the authority of her wedded tyrant was replete with horrors. She consulted her female friends; they ridiculed the injunction, as barbarous and absurd: but Sir Edward was inexorable, and notwithstanding all the
[Page 40]
energy of prayers, tears, and intreaties, the lovely Lady Aubrey was again condemned to waste her days in a solitude which was abhorrent to her nature.
Sir Edward had a younger brother, who at a very early age entered the army; his choice of a profession had been contrary to the wishes of his mother, and, for an act of disobedience which she deemed impardonable, he had not only been entirely estranged from the family, but excluded from any participation of the father's property; the whole of which had been left at the disposal of the deceased Lady Aubrey. This neglected brother was brave, amiable, and enlightened: Sir Edward had often heard his military reputation extolled; and, as his health gave symptoms of dissolution, frequently mentioned the injustice of his fortune. The estate of Glenowen, notwithstanding the cruelty of his unkind mother, was his by right, in case Sir Edward
[Page 41]
died without issue male, together with the title, deducting only twelve hundred pounds per annum , as Lady Aubrey's marriage settlement.
On the day preceding that which was fixed for their departure, Frances sickened of the small-pox; the disorder was of the most dangerous kind, and the graces of her countenance yielded to its malignity, while her reason and her life were, for a time, menaced by its violence. Lady Aubrey recovered, but existence was no longer desirable, since the powers of fascination had vanished for ever. Her beautiful features were changed and distorted, and the mirror which reflected her deformity looked like the fiat of total annihilation. Retirement was now the last refuge from complete disgrace. The old manor-house of Glenowen was the only spot on the habitable globe where Lady Aubrey hoped to find consolation; and
[Page 42]
without a murmur of regret she departed from that scene where she had been, successively, the victor and the vanquished.
There is no situation in life more completely wretched than that of a faded beauty, who, in the hours of universal conquest, neglected that cultivation of mind which can enliven the winter of age, and present a pleasing substitute for the most gratifying pursuits. Lady Aubrey had long erased from her memory the precepts of her father; and looking only for the enjoymentss of the present moment, wholly forgot that they were “though sweet, not lasting.” The source of rapture, the idol of adulation being destroyed, every hour presented a mournful vacuum, which seemed eternal; and the solitude to which she was hastening was in no respect calculated to solace her affliction. Sir Edward was more than ever the object of her aversion;
[Page 43]
every smile which the hope of regaining his long-lost repose excited, seemed to insult her sorrow, and to evince his triumph.
Though Frances had been three years absent from Glenowen, my mother had never once been remembered; she had frequently written to inquire after her beloved sister, but no notice had been taken of her letters. Penelope's mind was formed in nature's most perfect mould; it was composed of the purest passions, the most exquisite sensibility; she harmonized the ills of life by the affections of the heart; she could bear the humiliations of fortune, but not the neglect which is too often their attendant. Reared from her infancy in the society of one dear associate; one companion, whose age, studies, and amusements had been nearly similar to her own; conscious of never having deviated from the fondest affection, and pining under the
[Page 44]
severity of undeserved contempt; she lamented in silence, and devoted her thoughts to the most profound melancholy. It was in vain that my father counselled her to bear with patience the cold unnatural conduct of Lady Aubrey; Penelope's heart was stung to its innermost recesses—it was wounded not only deeply, but incurably.
After a tedious journey, Lady Aubrey once more beheld the misty mountains of Glenowen lifting their bare summits above the venerable trees that embowered the manor-house, and forming a diversity, at once soothing and picturesque. The next object which arrested her attention was the parsonage, the residence of my father, situated in the front of a beautiful thicket, and presenting its white-washed walls decorated with vine and jessamine, and skirted with a little garden,
Not idly gay, but elegantly neat.
[Page 45]
Reflection now rushed through the heart of Lady Aubrey; she recollected her unkindness towards the most amiable of women, and dreaded the moment which was to prove her own inferiority. On entering Sir Edward's estate, she quitted her carriage, and proceeded on foot across the upland meadow, towards the parsonage. The church-yard path led to the little garden, which was sheltered from the northern wind by a barren and stupendous mountain; on one side a small meadow was covered with newmown hay—and the sun's last beams blazed on the reflecting casements of every window. As she strolled pensively along, ruminating on the dreadful change her external form would present to every beholder, her eyes were fascinated by a neat and simple grave-stone, on which, while her blood almost congealed with horror, she read the following lines:
[Page 46]
O thou! whose cold and senseless heart
   Ne'er knew affection's struggling sigh,
Pass on, nor vaunt the stoic's art,
   Nor mock this grave with tearless eye.
For oft, when ev'ning's purple glow
   Shall slowly fade from yonder steep,
Fast o'er this sod the tear shall flow
   From eyes that only wake to weep.
No wealth had she, no power to sway,
   Yet rich in worth and learning's lore,
She wept her summer hours away;
   She hears the wintry storm no more!
Yet, o'er this low and silent spot
   Full many a bud of spring shall wave,
While she, by all, save one , forgot,
   Shall snatch a wreath beyond the grave.
Lady Aubrey had not resolution to read the inscription a second time; she saw the name of Penelope, and with tottering steps hastened towards the parsonage. The day had been sultry and glowing; the shades of twilight stole over the mountains; the spire of the village
[Page 47]
church was reddened by the warm rays of the western horizon, and the brown woods of Glenowen seemed to assume a deeper shade, as if to smite the soul with the anguish of compunction: it looked like the mourning of nature, while its more gaudy trappings were fading to oblivion.
Lady Aubrey entered the garden; the flowers which Penelope had planted were covered with dew; the bower which her hand had twined was dark, but not deserted—for a nightingale had fixed its abode among the branches, and was singing its evening song, in notes soothing though melancholy. She proceeded towards the parlour, which opened to the sweet and simple parterre , and on passing the threshold, discovered me, sleeping on the carpet: I had made myself a pillow of new hay, and, weary with the playful toil of infancy, was
[Page 48]
“lapped in Elysium.” She knelt, and kissed me; she bathed my glowing cheeks with a torrent of tears; my mother's virtues recurred to her memory, while a thousand agonizing ideas combined to reproach her. At this moment my father entered the parlour; I awoke; the sight of a stranger astonished me; Lady Aubrey snatched me to her bosom, and cheered me with caresses; my sensations were undescribable—I sighed and trembled, I knew not wherefore.
From my father's respectful demeanour, and the appearance of Lady Aubrey, whose habit was richly trimmed with gold, according to the fashion of the time, I believed the visitor to be something almost supernatural. When she spoke of my mother, her words were accompanied by a profusion of tears; I wondered at her emotion: I knew that my dear parent was suddenly estranged
[Page 49]
from me; but of death,—irrevoc able death,—I had not the smallest comprehension.
From that hour I became the inmate of the manor-house. The last sigh of my departed mother closed a servent prayer that Lady Aubrey would adopt and protect me. She knew that the curacy of Glenowen was small, and barely sufficient to support my father; she loved me with a degree of fondness bordering on enthusiasm; her fleeting breath blessed her ill-fated offspring; and as her feeble arm pressed me to her bosom, the tenderness of maternal love beamed in her languid eyes, till they were closed for ever.
Sir Edward's health continued declining, and the only pleasure which he seemed to enjoy, was that which he derived from my society: my playful gambols amused him when every recreation failed; and I loved him, notwithstanding
[Page 50]
his uncouth manners, beyond all other objects. I was frequently Lady Aubrey's companion, when she wandered about the woods, and to the church-yard, which was the scene of her unavailing sorrow. Many an evening, as the moon rose above the neighbouring eminences, have I played round the narrow heap of mould which concealed the ashes of Penelope, unconscious that it was the dark cold bed of the saint that gave me being.
Every day seemed to augment my power over the affections of Sir Edward and Lady Aubrey; I became the little sovereign of Glenowen; every wish was anticipated, every word was law: I traversed the domains of my patron, uncontrolled, exulting, happy!— The dawn broke on my smiles; and the close of day invited me to rest. Through Sir Edward's interest my father obtained a living of three hundred pounds per
[Page 51]
annum , in Gloucestershire, and I was, at two years of age, left under the protection of my aunt. The whole family considered me as Sir Edward's representative, and every individual seemed to feel pleasure in obeying me, except Mrs. Blagden, whose invincible hatred towards my mother was transferred to me as her offspring, and the epitome of my father. Every opportunity was embraced by my enemy to taunt and affront me; every little error of childhood was magnified into an unpardonable offence, and nothing but Sir Edward's increasing affection could have resisted her malice, or insured me an asylum in the manor-house of Glenowen.
As Lady Aubrey's diminution of personal graces precluded every idea of visiting the metropolis, her chief delight was that of improving the grounds and embellishing the family mansion, where
[Page 52]
she was destined to do penance for her past folly. The surrounding scenery was beautifully picturesque, and richly adorned, by hills and vallies, woods and water, diversified with all the luxuriance of nature. In addition to these, every thing that fancy could devise or ingenuity invent, was procured at an inordinate expence, to decorate the situation. Lady Aubrey's apartments were more costly than convenient; more magnificent, than tasteful; but to excel, to reign, to astonish, had ever been her delight; and she resolved to command that admiration from the rude children of nature, which was no longer to be expected from the pupils of dissimulation.
In every plan of improvement, my health and recreation were considered as objects of the first importance. Plantations were inclosed for my hours of exercise; a winding path was made to the
[Page 53]
summit of a mountain, that I might enjoy the salubrious breezes of morning as soon as the sun rose; a small river was diverted from its course, in order to form a shallow limpid bath, whose salutary effects might tend to invigorate my constitution; a paddock was fenced round, and a groom was constantly in waiting, to attend my rides; several small ponies being trained for my use, and kept entirely at my disposal. Ah, Rosanna! these my infant pleasures were the origin of all my sorrows! The tender plant, which has been raised by the transient warmth of spring, too often shrinks from the nipping blast, and dies before it blossoms.
The snow-drop, Winter's timid child,
   Awakes to life bedew'd with tears;
And flings around its fragrance mild,
And where no rival flowrets bloom,
Amidst the bare and chilling gloom,
   A beauteous gem appears!
[Page 54]
All weak and wan, with head inclin'd,
   Its parent breast, the drifted snow;
It trembles while the ruthless wind
Bends its slim form; the tempest lours,
Its em'rald eye drops crystal show'rs
   On its cold bed below.
Poor flow'r! On thee the sunny beam
   No touch of genial warmth bestows;
Except to thaw the icy stream
Whose little current purls along,
Thy fair and glossy charms among,
   And whelms thee as it flows.
The night-breeze tears thy silky dress,
   Which, deck'd with silv'ry lustre, shone;
The morn returns, not thee to bless,
The gaudy crocus flaunts its pride,
And triumphs where its rival died,
   Unshelter'd and unknown!
No sunny beam shall gild thy grave,
   No bird of pity thee deplore;
There shall no spreading branches wave,
For Spring shall all her gems unfold,
And revel 'midst her buds of gold,
   When thou art seen no more!
[Page 55]
Where'er I find thee, gentle flow'r,
   Thou still art sweet, and dear to me!
For I have known the cheerless hour,
Have seen the sun-beams cold and pale,
Have felt the chilling wint'ry gale,
   And wept, and shrunk like thee!
CHAP. III. I had scarcely attained my third year, when Lady Aubrey gave hopes of presenting Sir Edward an heir to his estate and title. From this period her fondness for me evidently diminished; my artless and lively manners began to fatigue her; I was too boisterous to remain long in her presence, and too wild to be trusted where her eyes did not perpetually follow me: not so much on my account was she watchful, as on her own: the idea of any accident was terrible in Lady Aubrey's precarious situation, and I was deprived of every pleasure, in order to ensure her safety.
[Page 56]
Sir Edward was still fond of my company; and we often walked and conversed together, when driven from Lady Aubrey's society either by caprice or ill-humour. The change in my situation afforded no small degree of exultation to my adversary Mrs. Blagden; a fallen favourite seldom meets a friend; for the humiliations of innocence are the triumphs of malevolence.
Sometimes, when I was permitted to remain with Lady Aubrey, I observed her conversation with the neighbours who came to visit her; it frequently turned on the delight which would fill every heart in case Providence should bless her with a son. My little bosom swelled with grief, while the bath, the paddock, the plantations, and the ponies, were by anticipation bestowed on the expected heir of Glenowen, and, for the first moment in my life, I began to feel the miseries of dependence.
[Page 57]
With devouring eyes and a throbbing breast did I witness the splendid preparations for the eventful period which was to decide my future fortune. The cradle, covered with white satin, and the costly baby-linen, were to me sources of unutterable anguish. Nothing was talked of but the little stranger, the young Lord of Glenowen, who was expected to be more wise and more beautiful than any thing mortal. I longed, yet dreaded to behold this wonder, who had caused such magnificent arrangements. I had been accustomed to hear my features praised, my understanding commended; every thing I said excited a smile of approbation, till this wonderful successor was named: the change was terrible; I felt it, and trembled to look forward.
One day, passing with Lady Aubrey through the apartment, where the much-talked-of miracle was destined first to behold the light, I could not refrain
[Page 58]
from tears, as I kissed the hand which led me.“Walsingham, why do you weep?” said my aunt.
“For whom have you made this bed?” said I, putting forth my trembling hand, to touch the cradle.
“For a young stranger, who will be your companion; and whom you must love.”
“What! whether I will or no?” said I.
“He will be your friend, and you must learn to please him,” continued Lady Aubrey.
“ Must learn!” repeated I. “Why must I? for what does he come here?”
“To be my son.”
“Then what shall I be?”
“His friend; and if you prove worthy, he will provide for you.” This answer was delivered with a tone of haughty superiority, to which I had, till that moment, been a stranger. I felt an
[Page 59]
indignant glow rushing to my cheek: “Shall I never be able to provide for myself ?” said I. “Sir Edward wants nobody to provide for him. ”
“Because Sir Edward is rich;” answered Lady Aubrey with increased coldness.
“And why am not I rich? I am as pretty, and as good, as Sir Edward.”
“All are not born to prosperous fortune,” replied Lady Aubrey sternly: “some are wealthy, and others poor.”
“Am I one of the poor ones?” was my next question. Lady Aubrey could not answer it. The memory of my departed mother arrested the power of speech, and the conversation ended.
Rosanna! suffer me to pause a moment; the recollection of my past and melancholy days bewilders every faculty; from the glowing prospect of my earliest hours, I trace the deep gloom which has succeeded; I look back to years, darkened by perpetual sorrow; to
[Page 60]
hopes, awakened but to perish! The prejudices of infancy contributed greatly to check the young blossoms of affection which nature would have cherished: I was taught to hate my little cousin, before I had ever seen him: the domestics at Glenowen irritated my mind, and hourly mingled gall with “the milk of human kindness,” which was the natural inmate of my bosom. I was taunted with menaces that my reign would soon be over; I was told by Mrs. Blagden, that my father's infidelity to her would draw down a curse upon me; the young baronet was to keep me in subjection; and I should “find a vast difference, when my Lady had a son, who would be the rightful heir to Glenowen.” Such were the pernicious doctrines of degenerate minds: I considered my cousin as my tyrant, before he was yet born; and all the gentle touches of sympathetic fondness were lost in one important
[Page 61]
study, the study to resist, to vanquish my oppressor.
From the happiest, the gaiest of human beings, I became the most dejected and forlorn: the gradual neglect which I experienced from Lady Aubrey, served as an example for the whole family. I was snubbed and contradicted by every individual. My dress was less attended to; my meals less regularly served; a nursery in a remote part of the house was fitted up for my reception; it was dark and gloomy, and had been during the last twenty years uninhabited. A thousand idle tales were circulated respecting this solitary apartment; and, till I was destined to be its tenant, no servant would venture to visit it. To increase my chagrin, I was placed under the care of Mrs. Dickens, the housekeeper, whose temper and appearance completed my distress, and deprived me of every consolation.
[Page 62]
Lady Aubrey's neglect at last sunk into total indifference. I was not permitted to see her, during several successive days; and when an audience was granted, I was never allowed to speak, lest I should derange the nervous system, and discompose her spirits. Sir Edward was more kind; he often led me about the plantations, and to the summit of the mountains; but it was to shew me the woods, the streams, the lawns, the meadows, which were to enrich the little stranger,—the unborn object of my hatred.
I had so often heard my successor's name mentioned with exultation, that at length the sound became insupportable. I vented my little rage in the bitterest terms of abhorrence, and uttered many threats of vengeance whenever it should be my destiny to meet him. Mrs. Dickens, whose taunts provoked my violence, did not fail to repeat every
[Page 63]
expression, with additional terms of acrimonious malice; and, to complete my disgrace, Mrs. Blagden was deputed by the household, to represent my rebellious conduct to Lady Aubrey. Their machinations prevailed, and from that hour I was banished from her bosom, as a monster of arrogance, ingratitude, and deceit: I was deemed criminal before I knew the meaning of the word; and every breast was armed against a being, whose innocence prevented the possibility of offending. Unhappy Walsingham! thy hand trembles, thy heart bleeds at the recollection!
[Page 64]
CHAP. IV. During Lady Aubrey's situation of hope and solicitude, an event took place as terrible as it was unexpected. Sir Edward by a fall, during a fox-chace, was thrown over a steep and craggy precipice, from whence he was conveyed, mangled and lifeless, to Glenowen. I remember the grief and terror which wrung my heart, when I beheld his livid ghastly features, as he lay in state in the gothic hall, decked with all the pompous absurdity of armorial splendour. Lady Aubrey's affliction was of that species which does not kill; the idea of a funeral was too distressing for her feelings, though they could resist the pang of losing an indulgent husband; and, the day previous to Sir Edward's
[Page 65]
interment, Lady Aubrey and Mrs. Blagden departed for Bristol.
Mrs. Blagden was one of those fawning sycophants who wind about the heart of the credulous and unsuspecting; who are all humility till they possess the master-key of domestic secrets; and, in proportion as they are admitted into confidence, become arrogant and overbearing. Lady Aubrey was a pliant subject for the machinations of such a being;—vain, though no longer beautiful, and proud, without a claim to superiority, her weak mind languished for adulation, and her imperious bosom panted for dominion: Mrs. Blagden was the flatterer who poured forth the one, and the agent who promoted the other. She was at once Lady Aubrey's counsellor, confidant, and friend; the abettor of her follies, and the director of all her actions.
[Page 66]
I was, on their departure, left at Glenowen. Every thing looked melancholy; the woods, the mountains, the apartment which contained the portrait of Sir Edward, were, by turns, the objects of mournful contemplation. I wandered about, forlorn and dejected; inquired after Lady Aubrey; talked of Sir Edward; grew every hour more sorrowful; refused my usual portion of nourishment; and at last, pined myself into sickness. The sensibility of my heart excited no commiseration from the domestics; whenever I shed tears, I was reproached with ill-humour; and when I was silent, my taciturnity was placed to the account of pride. My mind was perpetually agonized by recollections of past happiness; and every delicious retrospect was darkened, by the anticipation of new miseries.
Three weeks after Lady Aubrey's departure, a letter arrived from Mrs.
[Page 67]
Blagden with the joyful intelligence that a son was born, to inherit the rich domains of Glenowen. A rustic fête was given in the park; the peasantry assembled from all parts of the country; and feasting and revelry were displayed in the villages round the manor. Every heart was bounding with rapture; every cheek exhibited smiles of satisfaction, except mine: I considered myself as an outcast, equally estranged from the sunshine of fortune, and the tranquil shades of domestic felicity. I sighed, moped, and wept incessantly. Often did I contemplate the hatchment, which displayed the pomp of sorrow, on the walls of the manor-house, and trace with an unfeigned regret the same heraldry, as that which emblazoned the escutcheons, when Sir Edward's corpse lay in the great hall. I recollected his looks when living; his smiles; his expressions of fondness; and when I was informed that I never should
[Page 68]
either see or hear him more, my grief was vehement and ungovernable.
Lady Aubrey's health demanding change of climate, it was determined that she should immediately depart for Nice. She had never visited. Wales since the birth of the infant Sir Sidney, and the news of her intention did not reach. Glenowen, till she had landed on the continent. I heard the letter read by Mr. Martlet, the steward; it concluded with these words: “Take proper care of poor little Walsingham, and teach him to respect and to love his cousin. The ponies may be sold, as the period of my return to Glenowen is very uncertain.” This last article of intelligence seemed like an overwhelming shadow, vanquishing all my hopes, and darkening all my prospects.
Three years passed, and Lady Aubrey still resided at Nice. My education was entirely neglected, and I wandered about
[Page 69]
like a wild inhabitant of the mountains. The chilling dew and the scorching sun were alike familiar to me; and I began to cherish that love of solitude, which rendered me, almost, an infant misanthrope. Mr. Martlet and Mrs. Dickens were the only inmates of our lonely habitation beside myself; the former, savagely austere; and the latter, peevishly contradicting. I slept alone in my dreary chamber; and, whenever I dared to remonstrate, I was told that Sir Edward would come and chastise me. The idea filled my mind with undescribable sensations; wherever I wandered, I fancied that I beheld him pale, mangled, and ghastly, as he appeared in his coffin. My spirit was depressed; my heart was almost broken; many a night did I watch the moon-beams as they entered the long casement of my chamber, while imagination conjured up
[Page 70]
a thousand phantoms to intimidate my soul, and sicken it with horrors.
The solitude in which I was condemned to waste my infant hours, implanted the first roots of that melancholy which has never ceased to be the prominent characteristic of my nature. For nothing can be more certain, than that the general tenor of the mind through life fashions its bent from the impressions of that period, when reason begins to dawn, and memory takes root in the young and opening fancy. The images which are then stamped upon the brain can scarcely be eradicated; and I believe that, could we trace the origin of cowardice, deceit, and superstition, it would be found, that they were inculcated by the babbling tales of gossips, and the pernicious maxims of ignorance and folly. That such impressions are dangerous, cannot be denied; that they
[Page 71]
are often indelible, is equally certain: for we frequently forget events which take place at advanced periods of life; though the most trivial circumstances which occurred during the earliest hours of infancy, are fresh and clear even to the last moments of existence.
Mr. Martlet constantly wrote to my father, informing him that I was well, and happy. I had no means of convincing my parent that the information was erroneous; and my intreaties to be permitted to visit him, only excited the indignation of my companions. Mrs. Dickens, to a temper fretful and persecuting, united a countenance, that “might appal the devil!” Whenever my glances encountered hers, I trembled; and frequently, amidst my solitary walks, the echo of her voice has made me shudder. I was neither watched nor cherished, but permitted to stroll whereever my inclinations led me. Many a
[Page 72]
time was I brought home by the peasantry, who found me sleeping on the margin of the river, whose rapid current foamed along the valley, or wandering on the steep sides of the mountains in the vicinity of Glenowen. The recollection of these my early days has frequently led me to bow before the muse, who has been my only consolation, when the cold, unfeeling world, frowned upon my sorrows. With a mournful exactitude I recollect the earliest occupations of childhood; they were romantic, almost to incredibility.
   Ne wealth had I; ne garland of renown;
      Slow pass'd the minutes thro' the livelong day,
   Till from the upland mead, and thistled down,
      I watch'd the sun's last lustre steal away.
   And if perchance my little heart was gay,
      It beat to hear some merry minstrel's note,
   Or goat-herd, carolling his roundelay
      On craggy cliff; while, from the linnet's throat,
Full many a winding trill on airy wings wou'd float.
[Page 73]
   For oft, upon the brow of mountain steep,
      As slow the landscape faded from my view,
   With devious step I wander'd far, to weep,
      While all around the sultry vapours flew,
      Heedless of with'ring bolt, or drizzly dew,
   And, as the giant shadows vanquish'd day,
      Veiling the woodland dell in dusky hue,
   By the small tinkling sheep-bell wou'd I stray,
And, like to Elfin ghost, bemoan the hours away.
   Or, when the wint'ry moon, with crystal eye,
      Above the promontory bleak 'gan sail,
   Shrouding her modest brow in amber sky,
      While shrill the night-breeze whistled o'er the vale;
      Oft did I pour my melancholy tale,
   By some clear shallow stream, that wander'd slow,
      Listless and weary, indolent and pale,
   My bosom swelling high with bitter woe;
Which none but luckless wight, with tender heart can know.
   And oft, to other's plaints did I give heed;
      For all that griev'd my bosom learnt to sigh;
   I could not see the fleecy victim bleed,
      Ne snare the freeborn tenant of the sky;
      Nor lesser wight should fall when I stood by;
[Page 74]
   For vile oppression rous'd my little rage;
      In combat fierce the younker to defy,
   I would with breathless ire my limbs engage,
While neither threats nor pain my anger could assuage.
   With ebon locks unkempt and mean attire,
      A mountain weather-beaten wight was I;
   And passing meek, save when resentful ire
      Bade from my glance the living light'nings fly,
      To think that vice should virtue's place supply.
   For though no classic knowledge grac'd my mind,
      From legends old, or feats of chivalry,
   Still round my heart the wond'rous instinct twin'd,
Which throbb'd through ev'ry vein, the love of human kind.
Another winter elapsed when a letter arrived from Lady Aubrey, intimating that she meant to remain some time longer in the south of France; and desiring Mr. Martlet to find a careful person, in whom he could confide, and who might, without delay, conduct me to her. My joy was boundless. I forgave
[Page 75]
all her former unkind treatment, and only looked forward to the hope of reinstating myself in her good opinion; but my rapture was checked, my bosom chilled, my pride humbled, when Mr. Martlet read aloud the concluding lines of Lady Aubrey's letter— “Sir Sidney will want a companion to attend him; and I dare hope that Walsingham will prove worthy of his protection by a respectful demeanour, and a proper sense of his own situation.” These were her words, they sunk deep into my heart— I never shall forget them.
The day was fixed for my departure; a young man, who was the son of my father's successor in the curacy of Glenowen, was the person selected to be my companion and protector. He was amiable, enlightened, and had been classically educated by his mother's relations, who were rich and respectable. Mr. Hanbury
[Page 76]
was delighted in having an opportunity of travelling; and, early in the spring, we set out together. Never did the tenant of a beamless dungeon feel more delight in emancipation from misery, than did I in escaping from the tyranny of Mrs. Dickens; and my joy was infinitely augmented by the prospect of felicity, which the conciliating and polished manners of my new associate presented to my imagination.
Before my departure I wandered over all my native haunts; explored every path, and gazed wistfully at every favourite tree; for, having nothing human on which I could bestow my affections, they had, imperceptibly, attached themselves to inanimate objects. I walked round many of them, and measured their circumference, in order to ascertain their enlargement, whenever fate should reconduct me to Glenowen.
[Page 77]
With a bosom sympathetically sad, I strolled to the mountain where I had so often wandered with Sir Edward; from the bleak and barren summit I contemplated the tranquil scene below; the winding river, the smooth and glassy lake reflecting the evening sky, and enlivening the valley by a diversity, pleasing but not gaudy. The roof of every little cottage seemed an object of the tenderest interest; while the village church, whose whitened spire rose above the foliage of a venerable wood, reminded me of my lost patron, whose cold remains were mouldering within its hallowed precincts. Such were the occupations of the last three days; they awakened my regret; they diffused a glow of sensibility through my heart; the trees, the plants, the smallest mountain flowers, were greeted with a silent tear; and I fancied that the objects of my attention, as though grateful for my pains, looked
[Page 78]
more fresh and lovely by every sigh that escaped from my bosom.
It was not till the carriage came to the manor-house, soon after day-break, that I had resolution to visit the apartment which contained the portrait of Sir Edward. I longed, yet dreaded to behold it: I opened the door with a trembling hand, I entered cautiously; every thing around me was silent, damp, and gloomy: the windows, still dim with the morning dew, shed a cold and melancholy light, which seemed congenial to the temper of my mind and the task I was about to execute. I advanced a few paces within the apartment—stopped—shuddered— looked back towards the threshold, half fearful, half determined—again stepped forward, and stood for several minutes gazing on those features which I had kissed a thousand times with the most ardent affection, scarcely able to refrain from addressing the senseless canvass,
[Page 79]
and telling it that I was about to quit Glenowen. Something like an adieu faultered on my lips, when I fancied that the countenance bore traits of tender reproach; I climbed a table which stood beneath the portrait—the eyes seemed full of tears—I kissed the cheek—it was cold and humid; my bosom thrilled—I descended hastily—the eyes appeared to follow me—I rushed out of the apartment overwhelmed with terror and distress.
Mr. Hanbury met me at the door, and led me through the great hall towards the park: on the steps stood Mr. Martlet and my tyrant Mrs. Dickens; they overpowered me with caresses: I shrunk from them with abhorrence: all their past inhumanity rushed into my mind; I looked at Mr. Hanbury with an indignant smile, while the she-dragon endeavoured to drop a tear, which nature denied, because it was summoned
[Page 80]
by hypocrisy.— “We shall break our hearts at losing our little master,” cried Mrs. Dickens; “for,” continued the shrewd dissembler, “we love him very dearly.”
“Since when?” said I, in a tone of resentment which interrupted her. Mr. Hanbury reproved my ungracious manner, while I darted into the carriage, which, as soon as my new associate had taken his seat, proceeded along the park. As we lost sight of Glenowen, my companion endeavoured to divert my mind, by anticipating the scenes through which we were destined to pass, during our long journey; yet my fancy lingered on the portrait of Sir Edward; and I thought that, could it have been the partner of our travels, I should have felt completely happy. I recollected that it was left with the crabbed house-keeper; and, knowing that it had not the power
[Page 81]
to complain, I concluded that it would be entirely neglected.
I am minute, amiable Rosanna, even to the most trivial circumstance; not because I suppose that the propensities, thoughts, and feelings of an infant can interest you strongly; but in order to extenuate the errors of a more advanced age, by proving that the miseries of this sublunary journey in a great degree depend on our commencement of it. You will be convinced at least, that it was so with me, by the disastrous events which compose my melancholy story.
It is impossible to delineate the impressions which my mind received from the variety of wonders which presented themselves as we advanced on our route ; the beauties of nature charmed me, almost to ecstasy; glowing, luxuriant, and perpetually changing. The rich diversity on every side astonished and delighted:
[Page 82]
for I had, till that period, believed that the old manor-house of Glenowen was the largest in the world; and that every object, rich or fascinating, was confined to the scene which had witnessed my raptures and my tears.
Mr. Hanbury, who, from the commencement of our journey, denominated himself my tutor, observed the animation of my heart, and hourly enlightened my dawning reason by the mildest precepts of philanthropy, while the love of human kind was pourtrayed in colours so bewitching, that I felt my bosom glow even to enthusiasm.
Lady Aubrey had, in her letter to Mr. Martlet, desired that, exclusive of the money allowed for our travelling expences, one guinea should be presented to me for the gratification of my childish propensities. It has been a subject of observation to me through life, that no circumstance more decidedly marks
[Page 83]
the bent of young and opening minds than the manner of expending the trifling sums which are generally allowed for the recreations of infancy. Nothing expands the heart like the consciousness of independence; and no sensation so deeply implants the virtues in the human breast, as the pleasure of doing a benevolent action: why then is infancy to be deprived of a gratification which would, by exercise, become habitual? Every faculty of the soul is delighted by the power of doing good; a power, which cannot be permitted too early, or practised too often.
On the morning of our departure from Glenowen, for the first time in my life, I felt rich and independent. The guinea which Mr. Hanbury presented to me seemed sufficient for every worldly, gratification; I gazed on it with rapture.— “Is it my own?” inquired I,
[Page 84]
with a voice rendered inarticulate by ecstasy.
I was answered in the affirmative.
“Can I do whatever I like with it?”
I was told that I could.
“And am I obliged to love you, and to obey you, because you gave it to me?”
“Certainly not,” replied my tutor.
“Then I will love you and obey you too,” said I, snatching his hand, and embracing it with affection.
Here, Rosanna, let me apologize for that egotism which is unavoidable. I am delineating a portrait from nature; my hand is guided by the sacred impulse of truth; and if the earliest outlines are advantageous, you will also find that the darker shades shall not be tinted over by the touches of a flattering pencil. We do not create ourselves; Nature is a liberal parent; and were not her children the slaves of prejudice, or
[Page 85]
the dupes of their own passions, the circle of enlightened humanity would enlarge, till vice and folly would be extinguished in its lustre.
CHAP. V. At the close of our first day's journey, ascending a steep hill, I could not help remarking the exertions of the horses, and condemning myself for sitting contentedly while they were obliged to perform such painful labour. I proposed quitting the chaise, and walking to the summit of the acclivity; Mr. Hanbury acceded to the suggestion, and, with eager alacrity, I leaped from the vehicle, which seemed considerably lightened by the step which I had taken. The postboy thanked me; and as we continued
[Page 86]
to ascend, the conversation became general; the lad, though of simple manners, evidently possessed a mild and compassionating heart. He lamented the sufferings of animals, whose weary limbs could scarcely perform the task allotted them 2 . “This beast,” said he, pointing to the shaft-horse, “has won many a plate at Newmarket, and had grooms to attend him; and, in his young days, was the pride of his pedigree. Poor fellow!” continued the post-boy, “he is out of favour now, and forced to put up with hard usage.”
“Is he forced to bear it?” said I, with an indignant sensation, which never failed to attend the idea of compulsion.
[Page 87]
The postboy smiled in pity. “His labours will soon be finished,” answered he; “for my master only keeps a limited number of horses, and he bought a successor for poor Match'em this morning.”
“What! is another coming to take his place?” said I, while tears gushed from my eyes; tears impelled by the strong power of sympathy. “Where will he go? what will become of him? Will you sell him for a guinea?”
“I dare not dispose of my master's property,” replied the lad; “but a guinea is as much as he is worth: his old bones have scarcely flesh to cover them; though I warrant his coat was once as sleek as the doe.” Here the post-boy gently smoothed the panting side of the meagre animal, who, turning his head round, with speaking eyes seemed to thank him for his kindness.
[Page 88]
“Perhaps he will get well again, and be happy,” said I.
“Not in this world!” answered the postillion.
“Will he in the next?” inquired I.
Mr. Hanbury smiled. “His destiny will end with this life,” said my tutor. “He has not an immortal soul, as you have.”
“How are you certain of that?” cried I, still watching the exhausted posthorse.
“Reflection tells me so,” replied Mr. Hanbury. “Brutes have only instinct; man has reason.”
“And has not this poor old fellow feeling as well as I?”
“Unquestionably.”
“Then is not the man who can treat him ill as great a brute as he?” Mr. Hanbury sighed, but made no answer. I continued, “It is very hard to endure
[Page 89]
a life of toil in this world, and to have no hopes of reward in the next. Where will he go when he dies?—Will Mrs. Dickens be happier than he? I am sure he never did half so many wicked things.”
“Poor Match'em will go to the kennel,” said the post-boy; “and the hounds will have but a scanty meal neither.” The idea electrified my heart, and roused all its sensibilities. I threw myself on a bank by the road side, and wept aloud. It was in vain that Mr. Hanbury reproved my conduct, called it childish, and conjured me to be more a man. The impression was deep and indelible —supplanted by another—driven from every happiness—ill-treated—condemned to milery. The fate of Match'em bore too striking a similarity to my own to be passed over in silence: my grief was inordinate; and, as neither art nor persuasion could tempt me to enter
[Page 90]
the carriage, we proceeded the remainder of the stage on foot; the horses following slowly by the path side.
On our arrival at the inn I stole from my tutor, who was engaged in paying the postillion and ordering supper, and followed Match'em to the stable-yard. I waited while he was rubbed down and watered, I remained by till his feed was set before him: but he was too weary and feeble to eat; his hollow eyes were glazed with the film of age; his meagre sides seemed to pant for a short hour of wretchedness, and he sunk on his litter, wholly exhausted. I knelt on the straw, and endeavoured to cheer him by many soothing expressions; I stroked his lean lank cheek repeatedly: he looked at me with an expression that wrung my heart in every fibre. “Poor Match'em!” said I, “if thou wert mine thou shouldst never toil again: thou shouldst have green meadows and
[Page 91]
clear springs to comfort thee. No new favourite should supplant thee in my affections; I would love thee for thy past merit, and thou shouldst die calmly and contentedly.” I thought he sighed and shuddered.
A young horse stood in the adjoining stall; for a moment I quitted my situation and viewed him attentively. He was in perfect condition; his eyes sparkled with the fire of youth; his coat was smooth as the roe-buck; his limbs were firm and sinewy; he reared his head, as if triumphant; he breathed animation. This, thought I, is the fellow who is come to supplant poor Match'em. I turned away with disgust; and, as I again bent my bosom over the worn-out sufferer, a tear fell on his innocent face, which relieved a heart that was overcharged with pity.
At this moment the master of the inn entered the stable.
[Page 92]
“What are you doing here, young gentleman?” said he; “your companion has been looking after you this half hour.” He took my hand, and would have led me out of the stable, but I resisted firmly.
“What do you want?” cried the innkeeper.
“To buy this old horse,” said I.
“Lord love your heart,” continued the host, “what can you do with him?”
“Any thing but kill him,” answered I with emotion, somewhat expressive of anger at the idea.
“What will you give for him?” cried the inn-keeper.
“A guinea;” and the piece of gold was out of my pocket in an instant.
“You shall have him for two,” said the hard dealer.— “His hide is worth the money: indeed I have bargained for as much; but as you seem struck with
[Page 93]
the poor beast, you shall have the preference.”
Bargained for as much! thought I. Inhuman, sordid man! was it for such a vile return that he has toiled and worn his wretched limbs even to the very bone? Has he run his race and ended his career of triumphs, to be at last so basely bartered for? Would not his few short days, the remnant of a weary life, passed in some calm and silent valley, have repaid thee tensold for thy pity? Thou unkind master! Cannot his meagre form, his dim, yet speaking eyes, move thy unfeeling bosom to mitigate his sentence? “Thou shalt not perish!” exclaimed I, as the inn-keeper led me across the threshold. I broke from him, and flew to Mr. Hanbury. I told him how, and where I had passed my truant moments—he had not resolution to condemn me.
[Page 94]
Encouraged by his forgiveness, I ventured to urge my suit. I poured forth the sorrows of my bosom in all the genuine eloquence of nature; the guinea was still clenched in my hand; when looking round with a countenance of despair, my eyes were fascinated by an engraving, which hung over the chimney: it was the portrait of Match'em.— He was there pictured in all his vigour, youth, and beauty, his groom attending him. Mr. Hanbury read the lines printed beneath the plate; they told his pedigree—they recorded his triumphs. I could only articulate “Look at him!” when the power of speech was subdued by the excess of sorrow.
Mr. Hanbury sent for the inn-keeper; as he entered the room my heart throbbed with hope and apprehension. He had a scowling brow and his features seemed cast in the iron mould of severity. The portrait of Match'em lay on
[Page 95]
the table before me. With what tender commiseration did I behold his taper limbs! his eyes, whose animation was so well delineated by the nice touches of the artist. I fancied that I saw him flying over the extensive downs with the swiftness of the wind, and distancing his bold competitors, while every artery in his fine form seemed new-strung by the consciousness of victory. My mind was rapt in meditation, when Mr. Hanbury demanded, “Will you sell old Match'em.”
I repeated his words instantaneously. The inn-keeper was too expert in the ways of traffic not to make his advantage of our humanity. Five guineas was the sum demanded; not without many encomiums on the good qualities yet remaining, to authorise the price.— “The horse, sir, is a good horse, and with a little care may yet do many a day's hard work. I have no great mind to part
[Page 96]
with him at all; but as you seem to have taken such a liking to him, to oblige the young gentleman—”
Mr. Hanbury interrupted him by offering four guineas. The host concluded the conversation by accepting the sum, and we sat down to supper equally well pleased with the adventure of the evening.
Mr. Hanbury's father had already one old pensioner, who merely retained strength to carry him to the neighbouring villages, himself being infirm. The venerable servant had the range of a small meadow belonging to the parsonage; and it instantly occurred to my benevolent tutor, that Match'em might be the companion of his age's solitude. The suggestion made my bosom glow with new delight: we rose early in the morning to witness his departure: I kissed his meagre shoulder—bade him be stout—and told him that the fresh
[Page 97]
breezes from the mountains of Glenowen would cheer his poor old heart: and that when I returned again I should see him well and happy. I thought he understood me: a lucid drop rolled down his face; I wiped it off, and turning to my tutor exclaimed, “How merry he will be when he finds that he has nobody to control him!” The groom smiled at my simplicity. It was the unsophisticated touch of nature, harmonized by pity. From that hour my affection for Mr. Hanbury was firmly rooted in my mind: the strong cords of congeniality united us: he had gratified the first wish in which my heart had felt a serious interest; and by enabling me to indulge a benevolent propensity, had taught me to know the value of existence.
I walked with my tutor to the summit of a steep hill, and watched the rescued Match'em as the groom led him across
[Page 98]
an extensive common towards Glenowen. My sensations were undescribable: he became every moment less and less distinct, and when I totally lost fight of him, I could not suppress the involuntary exclamation, “Thank God! Mrs. Dickens will have nothing to do with him!”
The spark of celestial sympathy which has since kindled affections, glowing, vivid, agonizing, and fatal! seemed from that period to warm my heart: and however trivial such events may appear to the frozen eye of stoicism, the feeling bosom will allow their claims, and confess, that they were the sure prognostics of a life of sorrow.
[Page 99]
CHAP. VI. Mr . Hanbury took more than ordinary pains to expand my thinking faculties; unfolding, by the eloquence of truth, the many worldly cares which humanity is destined to encounter: he taught me to explore the page of nature with more than childish avidity, and thereby awakened that glowing enthusiasm which has been the source of all my anguish. Events which commonly pass before the eye of youth like fleeting shadows, were to me penetrating and important: for I considered the world as a vast and varying theatre, where every individual was destined to play his part, and to receive the applause or disapprobation of his surrounding contemporaries.
In our route towards Dover, we stopped two days in the metropolis; Mr.
[Page 100]
Hanbury had some commissions to execute for Lady Aubrey, and a draft to receive at her banker's for the expences of our journey. As it was too late on the afternoon of our arrival to transact business, my kind and indulgent tutor proposed passing the evening at the theatre. The play was King Lear. The miseries of the venerable parent, and the barbarity of his “pelican daughters,” by turns rivetted my attention, and penetrated my bosom. The frantic Edgar interested me powerfully, till Mr. Hanbury informed me that his frenzy was assumed, for the purpose of deceiving. Hypocrisy, in whatever shape it presented itself, never failed to awaken my abhorrence; to feign was, in my opinion, to be both mean and criminal. The indifference with which I contemplated the pretended maniac, only afforded additional vigour to those feelings which were excited by the neglected
[Page 101]
father, whose injuries, complaints, and unprotected age seized on my shuddering heart-strings. I trembled sighed, and wept, through all the progressive scenes of his humiliations, till I beheld him, wild and bare-headed, exposed to all “the pelting of the pitiless storm.” The shock was electric; my swelling breast could not sustain its conflicts; I sprung from my seat, and cried aloud, “Give him my guinea, and send him to Glenowen.”
The laugh, which this spontaneous outrage occasioned, disconcerted me. Still my hand grasped the guinea, and my desire to throw it on the stage was with difficulty conquered. Mr. Hanbury had often charged me never to check the divine impulse of humanity. The scene which I contemplated was new to me, and the effect which it produced upon my senses will never be forgotten. I watched my tutor's countenance,
[Page 102]
and to its unbending gravity, alone, I attribute the decorum, which marked my conduct during the remainder of the evening. A thousand times, notwithstanding the constraint placed upon my actions, did my eyes glance alternately at those of Mr. Hanbury and my unpocketed guinea, till the curtain dropped, and my spirits were entirely exhausted.
On the following day we set out for Dover: the journey was pleasant, and my curiosity inordinate; every hour passed in questions on one side, and explanations on the other; for my tutor deemed no lesson of information too trivial, where a strong desire after knowledge animated the mind of his pupil. Every moment presented some new wonder; but when the wide and troublous ocean opened to our view, my agitation was infinite. I gazed, mute and immovable during several minutes;
[Page 103]
my eye-lids never winked, left I should lose sight of the object which awakened my astonishment; while the large, complicated, and moving bodies ploughing through the limpid element, and approaching rapidly towards that part of the liquid plain which seemed eternal, produced an awful consternation, and with a tremulous voice I inquired, “Whither are they going?”
“Far beyond the edge of yonder horizon,” replied my tutor.
“Will they never return? Have they no home? Who will take care of them?” were the next questions.
“That Supreme Being,” replied Mr. Hanbury, “who can command the winds and waters! who can lift the waves like mountains, and quell the loudest howling of the tempest! He, who harmonizes the varying seasons, regulates the planets, and gives the
[Page 104]
wondrous faculty of thought which animates the mind of man!”
“Where does he dwell?” said I, with fearful veneration.
“Every where,” replied my tutor.
“He knows the secrets of all hearts. His power is infinite; his will, omnipotent! we are but creatures formed to obey him;—yet there are those who dare rebel, and—
“How can we offend him, since he has power to command our actions and our thoughts?” interrupted I. Mr. Hanbury made no answer, but changed the subject, by remarking the beauty of the out-stretched ocean, faintly tinged with the crimson light which glowed along the western horizon. It was the close of evening; the soft and refreshing breeze seemed to whisper over the gently bounding waters, as if fearful of disturbing nature, then sinking to repose.
[Page 105]
I returned to the inn, deeply ruminating on the new wonders which I had contemplated.
Early on the following morning we embarked for France. My sensations were inconceivable when I found the vessel buoyant on the waves, and, as I thought, turned adrift, at the mercy of a tremendous element. The land, as it seemed to recede, acquired an interesting something, which awakened my affections, and blended with them a regret that was poignant. My tutor watched the rising emotions of my mind, and was delighted with them. He saw my eyes suffused with tears, my bosom struggling with half-stifled sighs;—I could not conceal my sensations;—the love of my country glowed in every vein, the stupendous cliffs, extending their white ramparts round my native island, led back my thoughts to the
[Page 106]
breezy mountains of Glenowen: the recollection, after seven mournful years had elapsed, produced the following.
STANZAS.
Farewel, dear Glenowen! adieu to thy mountains,
   Where oft I have wander'd to welcome the day;
Farewel to thy forests, thy crystalline fountains
   Which stray thro' the valley, and moan as they stray.
O'er wide foamy waters I'm destin'd to travel,
   A poor, simple exile, forlorn and unknown;
Yet while the dark fates shall my fortune unravel,
   My thoughts, my affections shall still be thy own.
Thy cities, proud Gallia, thy wide-spreading treasures,
   Thy vallies, where nature luxuriantly roves,
May bid the heart, dancing to fancy's wild measures,
   Forget, for a moment, its own native groves:
But where is the bosom that sighs not in sorrow,
   Estrang'd from dear objects, to wander alone;
Still counting the moments, from morrow to morrow,
   A poor weary traveller, lost and unknown?
[Page 107]
Sweet vistas of myrtle, and paths of gay roses,
   And hills deck'd with vineyards, and woodlands with shade,
Fresh banks of young vi'lets, where fancy reposes,
   And courts gentle slumbers her visions to aid;
The dark silent grotto, the soft-flowing fountains,
   Where Nature's own music slow murmurs along;
The sun-beams that dance on the pine-cover'd mountains,
   May waken to rapture their own native throng.
But thou, dear Glenowen! canst bring sweeter pleasure,
   All barren and bleak as thy summits appear;
And tho' thou canst boast of no rich gaudy treasure,
   Still memory traces thy charms, with a tear!
The keen blast may howl, o'er thy vallies and mountains,
   And strip the rich verdure that mantles each tree;
And winter may bind, in cold fetters, thy fountains,
   And still thou art dear, O Glenowen! to me.
After a voyage of four hours we landed at Calais. The manners of the people, their dress, and their language, which was to my ears an unintelligible jargon, fascinated my attention, till we
[Page 108]
reached the hotel; the host met us at the outward gate, and conducted us to the best apartments. I was now addressed by the title of Monsieur and sometimes of Milor :—every body seemed to pay court to me; and I began to imagine that there was an air of importance about my person, which demanded their respect. Indeed a youth, of scarcely seven years old, attended by his tutor, and already commencing his travels, was no common object, and Mr. Hanbury's manners, united to an exterior of the first order, gave me a considerable degree of consequence. Vanity, notwithstanding, induced me to believe, that my own qualifications afforded me an exclusive right to that admiration, which was merely the effect of adventitious circumstances.
The first idea that struck my mind was the display of my riches; and while Mr. Hanbury ordered dinner, I proposed
[Page 109]
to the master of the hotel to change my guinea. Three French crowns, and a few pieces of non-descript copper, bearing neither date nor impression to ascertain their country or their value, were returned for my mine of gold, and I thought myself the happiest of beings.
We dined luxuriously; our desert was profuse and delicious: I had never before tasted wine, and I drank with ecstasy. My tutor, soon after dinner, quitted the room, to attend the debarkation of our luggage: during his absence the glass was not idle: seated at the head of the table with such a repast before me, I fancied myself an immortal. I touched every thing, I tasted all; again, and again, the exhilarating nectar sparkled in its “crystal bounds;” and I began to think that I had never existed till that moment.
[Page 110]
Animated by the juice of the grape, I sallied forth, and knew not whither I was straying till I found myself on the pier. I sat down on a parcel of goods which had been recently landed, and began to ruminate on what had passed since my departure from Glenowen. The portrait of Sir Edward, and the wornout Match'em divided my reflections, when a youth advanced to the extremity of the pier, leading a beautiful spaniel, round whose soft and silky neck a cord was fastened, at the end of which I observed a large stone, placed there in order to facilitate his sinking.
I rushed forward, and, just as the lad was about to plunge the unoffending victim into the deep and turbulent abyss, seized the cord, and grappling with the destroyer, demanded to know the cause of so barbarous an action. The boy did not understand my language, neither was I acquainted with his. My distress was
[Page 111]
infinite, when a revenue officer, who was waiting to inspect a vessel just entering the harbour, undertook to be our interpreter.
I soon learnt that the spaniel belonged to an English woman of fashion, who had that day landed at Calais; and who, having purchased a French lapdog, to be the partner of her journey to the South of France, had cruelly condemned her faithful companion to a watery sepulchre. All the energies of my soul were roused to arms at the recital. What! deserted for another , thought I: doomed to perish in order to make room for a new favourite! I could not bear the idea.
The clear and sparkling eyes of the beautiful animal seemed to implore my protection. He licked my hand; and again his looks were meekly persuasive. The boy informed me that he was to receive half a crown for the destruction
[Page 112]
of an inoffensive creature, whose appearance convinced me that he had once been a favourite. I sighed;—conviction struck upon my heart, and told me that my fate was not singular: that to be beloved one day, and deserted the next, were no new instances of the inconstancy which debases the human mind. The lad informed me that he was in haste, as the lady waited to reward him for his trouble. “For,” continued he, “she thought it better to let him die, than to leave him to the mercy of a new master.”
There was something like pity in this; and yet, that he should be discarded at all, was inhuman. While this reflection rushed across my mind, my hand instinctively fathomed my treasury, and double the sum which was offered for his death was tendered as his ransom. Our interpreter was not to lose his time, or waste his words without
[Page 113]
a recompence; he hoped that “my Lord would be pleased to remember him,” and his hopes were gratified; a crown was bestowed as a reward for his services; and Heaven can bear witness, that I never shall forget him!
Language cannot describe what I felt, when I beheld the stone loosened from the cord, and disappearing in the ocean which was so near being the grave of the deserted favourite. How fondly did I stroke his glossy coat, beautifully variegated with white and yellow, while he gazed in my face, and, jumping to my breast, by a thousand dumb, yet eloquent emotions, evinced his gratitude. I have often remarked, that the instinct of brutes displays those meek affections, that pure and gentle fidelity, and that noble sense of benefits received, which might spread the blush of shame over some of our most enlightened philosophers,
[Page 114]
and even authorise the doctrines of Pythagoras.
The day began to close, and I to think of Mr. Hanbury, when, to my infinite joy, I observed him hastening towards me. He reproved me for quitting the hotel, and for wandering alone, without his permission. But when I explained the cause of my remaining so long absent, his attention was transferred to my protegée , and my fault was entirely forgotten.
We returned to the hotel, where, on my relating the adventure, I was informed, that the unkind mistress of Chance , for such was the name which I gave the spaniel, had departed more than half an hour with her new companion. I inquired her name, and found that it was Lady Emily Delvin, a young and beautiful widow, who was making the tour of France and Italy, in search of conquest.
[Page 115]
We continued our journey: Chance, by incessant attentions, every hour seemed to attach himself more firmly: I talked to him on every subject, and fancied that he comprehended every question. Mr. Hanbury encouraged my affection for my dog, because he considered it as a trait of universal benevolence. Alas! why are we born with feelings that destroy us? Why is the human breast so sensitively organized, only to cherish sorrow, and to shrink with torture from the touch of persecution? What is that pleasing, painful, undefinable spell, which fastens round the heart, and presses to the palpitating fibres, an unremitting sense of misery? Is it virtue? Is it nature? Tell me, my gentle friend, for thou hast a soul alive to all the throbs of sympathy and feeling!
[Page 116]
CHAP. VII. My affection for my faithful Chance was commended in the warmest terms by my amiable tutor. As a domestic animal the dog has ever been my favourite; and it has never been a matter of surprise to me, that those creatures, whose sagacity frequently approaches to reason, have been mentioned by the most celebrated writers of antiquity.
Plutarch, in relating the departure of the Athenians from Athens in the time of Themistocles, describes, with benevolent energy, the cries and melancholy howlings of the dogs they left behind. One, in particular, was the theme of his panegyric: the faithful animal followed his master across the ocean as far as Salamis; when he died, the Athenians honoured him with a tomb; and the part
[Page 117]
of the island where his bones were deposited, was called the Dog's Grave, in commemoration of his fidelity.
My love for animals was sedulously cultivated by Mr. Hanbury, who upon all occasions expatiated on the enormity of exercising cruel propensities. He considered the conduct of children towards the brute species, as the strongest prognostic of their affections for their own. The smallest insect was not too mean for his observation or his sympathy; and he often repeated the beautiful lines of the immortal bard:
“—The poor beetle that we tread upon,
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great,
As when a giant dies.”
Mr. Hanbury was not singular in his opinion, respecting the care which ought to be taken, during our childhood, to cultivate humanity, and to awaken its finest feelings for every thing that lives;
[Page 118]
for Locke commends that mother who rewards or punishes her offspring, in proportion as they are kind or ungentle towards the dumb creation.
We travelled without interruption till we came within a few posts of Nice. The short period which had elapsed since I quitted my native mountains, had completely metamorphosed my outward appearance; and no less expanded the powers of mental cultivation. I studied in the school of nature! I saw the softest showers invigorate the opening buds of spring; I beheld them bursting forth to imbibe the ethereal distillations. I remarked them as they unfolded their leaves, exhaled their perfumes, flaunted their variegated colours, and, by progressive warmth, were nourished to perfection. The lofty forest trees seemed like the lords of the vegitating world; and yet I saw them levelled to the dust, and wither, like the most obnoxious
[Page 119]
weed or simplest flower. These observations were encouraged by Mr. Hanbury, whose method of inculcating knowledge was, by convincing arguments, conveyed in the purest language of truth. He often repeated a maxim of an ill-fated boy 3 , (whose death will ever stigmatize his nation,) that “every thing was within the power of man, if he would but stretch forth his arms to reach it.”
The kindness of Lady Aubrey, in drawing me from the deep solitude in which I had been obscured from my birth, filled my bosom with unbounded gratitude: all her former neglect was forgiven, in the hope that my vexations were at an end, and the dawn of happiness at length opening on my prospects.
It is impossible to give you any idea of my agitation, when Mr. Hanbury informed
[Page 120]
me, that in a few hours I should embrace Lady Aubrey, and my little cousin Sir Sidney. A mixture of pride and affection struggled in my breast, when I recollected that the latter had been the origin of all my humiliations. I questioned my tutor, whether I ought to love Sir Sidney as dearly as though he had never been my enemy. “Love him, in proportion as he is deserving,” replied Mr. Hanbury; “and, above all things, be careful not to form a too hasty opinion. An exterior will often deceive the most minute observer; and the finest faculties of the soul will sometimes lie dormant, for want of circumstances to call them into action. The distributed portions of intellect are more equal than some philosophers will acknowledge; and half the powers of mind that have illumined the habitable globe, owe their display to the combinations of chance, and the polish of education.”
[Page 121]
“Shall I ever be as great as Sir Sidney?” said I.
“Greater, if you are more wise and virtuous,” replied Mr. Hanbury.
“Then he will not govern me?” said I, smiling.
“That does not follow,” answered my tutor. “The most deserving are often under the control of the most vicious.”
“Then what are the advantages of being good?”
“The reward will be beyond the reach of oppression: it will centre in the mind!” replied Mr. Hanbury.
“Then the virtuous mind is sure of happiness?” said I.
“Not always,” replied my tutor, sighing; “the world is swayed by powers, which consist of many evils; inordinate wealth, ambition, pride, and arrogance frequently triumph over the most transcendant virtues; yet they find
[Page 122]
their votaries; while modest merit is condemned to pine in anguish; scoffed at by the ignorant; and persecuted by the vicious.”
“How shall I escape the enemies of virtue?” said I, earnestly.
“By arming your mind with fortitude; and meeting their injustice with contempt. If you would bring a villain to shame, repay his injuries with scorn. Evince the proud superiority of rectitude, by pity; and leave it to the mirror of reflection, to display that deformity from which conscious innocence shrinks with abhorrence.” Here the conversation ended.
The last day's journey seemed the most tedious I had ever known. The beauties of nature could not interest a mind possessed by thought, and agitated by expectation. I anticipated the affectionate embraces of Lady Aubrey, and the welcome smiles of my little cousin.
[Page 123]
I was delighted, almost to ecstasy! What vivid, what spontaneous joys quickened my pulses, and increased the glow of circulation! I was, by turns, animated by hope, and intimidated by apprehension. Alas! from the period that reason begins to shoot, the mind of man is a chaos of perpetual warfare; the affections of our early days combat with the propensities of nature, and struggle in the fetters of contradiction. The passions succeed; the stormy passions! pride, ambition, love !
Oh! memory! Here let me drop the pen, lest I should blot the melancholy record with a tear that would unman me.
[Page 124]
CHAP. VIII. The carriage stopped at the gate of Lady Aubrey's hotel, and we were ushered into a splendid saloon, which was prepared for an assembly. The servant informed us, that Lady Aubrey was engaged at her toilette, and that Sir Sidney had already retired to rest: for day had closed some time when we reached the end of our journey. The domestic, who though a Gascon spoke English fluently, entered into conversation with us, in a tone so conceited and familiar, that I was at a loss to discover his meaning; “You are the little boy whom my Lady has sent for, to wait on Sir Sidney,” said he, looking down on me with a contemptuous smile. I made no answer.—
“Poor fellow!” continued he, “you must mind how you conduct yourself in
[Page 125]
this family, for my Lady is very difficult to please, and hates all children, excepting Sir Sidney.”
“This character does little credit to your Lady's heart,” said Mr. Hanbury sternly.
“Why as for that,” continued the coxcomb, presenting his snuff-box to my tutor, “my Lady is a little comical, to be sure; but women are strange creatures, and have odd fancies. Lady Aubrey has but one favourite in the world, besides Sir Sidney; and to say the truth, her attachment has lately become perfectly ridiculous.”
“Puppy!” exclaimed Mr. Hanbury in a half whisper.—The flippant valet resumed the conversation.
“For my part, I am absolutely jealous of my Lady's partiality for an object unworthy of her regard; and I have not hesitated to acquaint her ladyship with my sentiments on the subject.”
[Page 126]
“Your Lady has, at least, one virtue,” said Mr. Hanbury.
“And what is that?” cried the valet.
“Patience.”
“Why, faith, I think so,” answered Lafond, “for she endures the shackles of a tyrant with a degree of forbearance that is astonishing.”
“Indeed!”
“Oh! quite notorious! all Nice talks of it.”
“So much the worse!” cried Mr. Hanbury gravely.
“I am weary of seeing things as they are,” said Lafond; “and if they do not mend, I shall move my quarters very speedily.”
“So much the better,” replied my tutor hastily. Lasond proceeded:—
“And yet I shall be sorry to leave Lady Aubrey, for I am the best friend she has in the family.”
“So I perceive,” said Mr. Hanbury, smiling.
[Page 127]
“But if she will disgrace herself by such an attachment, in defiance of reason and good counsel, she must expect nothing but contempt from those, who know how things ought to be. I often tell my Lady, that she should not countenance impertinent advisers.”
“Indeed! and how does she take it?”
“A little peevish for an hour or two, and then, all is forgotten.”
“'Tis a pity that she should forget such wise counsel,” said my tutor contemptuously; “or that a woman should be peevish towards one who is so tenacious of her reputation.”
“There is the mischief,” replied Lafond. “If she would but remove one person from her affections, she would stop the current of abuse that flows from as black a heart as ever disgraced the human breast.”
“Granted,” said Mr. Hanbury.
[Page 128]
“You seem to be a man of good understanding,” continued Lafond, again tendering his enamelled snuff-box; “and I shall be glad to see you exert your interest with my Lady, for the removal of her enemy.”
“You may depend upon my zeal on the occasion,” replied my tutor, looking sternly at Lafond. “Her enemy shall be removed; and, if she has an atom of pride or resentment in her nature, that very shortly.”
“You will do her a kindness which never can be sufficiently repaid,” cried the Gascon, not comprehending Mr. Hanbury's meaning.
“I am of your opinion,” said Mr. Hanbury sharply. “He who sees a serpent winding round a sleeping victim, an forbears to wake him, is answerable for the mischiefs of its sting.”
“Very well described! very well indeed!” answered Lafond. “You are a man of some knowledge, I perceive.”
[Page 129]
“Not much, and yet I know a scoundrel when I see him.” The tone and look, with which this last remark was uttered, left no room to doubt its application. Lafond hummed a tune, and quitted the apartment.
“A lover! a favourite! living under the roof with Lady Aubrey,” cried my tutor, “what can it mean? This event will account for her long absence from her native country;—for her neglect of thee, my poor ill-treated boy.” He walked about the saloon agitated and amazed; frequently gazing on me, with a mixture of pity and affection.
We had remained more than an hour in the saloon, when Mrs. Blagden, whom we found in the character of Sir Sidney's governess, entered, and immediately conducted us to Lady Aubrey's dressing-room. She received us politely; but there was a reserve in her manner which was chillingly repulsive. After thanking
[Page 130]
Mr. Hanbury for the trouble which he had taken, she added, glancing at me for the first time, “Poor Walsingham! why he looks like a wild inhabitant of the Welsh mountains! I hope, notwithstanding, that he will prove worthy of my favour; though,” added she, after a short pause, during which she adjusted her head-dress, “we seldom find much gratitude from poor relations.” I turned my eyes towards Mr. Hanbury, who, perceiving my mortification, pressed my hand affectionately. Lady Aubrey continued:
“I hope, Sir, you have taught this child to know his situation.”
“I have, Madam; and to know himself also,” replied my tutor.
“I don't perceive the least family likeness,” said Lady Aubrey, looking at her glass and me, alternately.
“Not the least,” rejoined Mr. Hanbury emphatically.
[Page 131]
“I suppose the poor thing is terribly ignorant,” continued Lady Aubrey; “he has been very much neglected.”
“He has indeed!” replied my tutor, sighing.
“I think he is very lucky to be taken care of at all,” cried Mrs. Blagden, with a malicious sneer that made me shiver.
“As for education, it would only be thrown away upon him; for he seems to be but a stupid dolt, only fit to live in obscurity.”
“Well,” said Lady Aubrey, “it cannot be helped; we must see what can be done with him. I dare say he will be quite polished enough for the rank he will hold in society.”
“He has intellects of the first order,” cried my indulgent and partial tutor.
Lady Aubrey shook her head and continued: “You have not seen Sir Sidney; he is quite a miracle! So beautiful! so clever! all the world talks of him.”
[Page 132]
I was astonished, when she made this assertion, that, during our long journey, we had never once heard his name mentioned. At this moment the door was opened, and a young man of fashionable appearance entered. On perceiving strangers, he started back, and would have retired, but Lady Aubrey informed him, in a loud whisper, that we were “people of no consequence, and would be dismissed in a few moments.”
To bear, and to forbear, is the province of humble worth: yet the consciousness of innate virtue, opposed to the emptiness of pride and insolence of power, makes the scale of justice even; and amply recompenses the enlightened mind for the deficiencies of fortune. Mr. Hanbury repaid the arrogance of Lady Aubrey with a smile of commiseration, as he rose to quit the room, when the young visitor taking my hand exclaimed, “Where the devil did you
[Page 133]
come from? Upon my honour, I never saw any thing half so comical!”
“I came from Glenowen,” said I, blushing and mortified.
“From Glenowen!” cried the inquisitive stranger; “I should rather have conjectured that thy tawny physiognomy had first met the light in the wilds of Otaheite. What is thy name, my man of copper?”
“Walsingham Ainsforth,” answered I, reddening and confused.
“And who is this?” continued the bud of nobility, turning towards Mr. Hanbury, who was mute with astonishment.
“My tutor,” replied I.
“Thy tutor, boy!” exclaimed the visitor; “and what does he teach thee? to yell the war-whoop, or to hunt the wild bear?”
“Not exactly either,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury. “The knowledge I
[Page 134]
wish to inculcate, is more rational, though not less perilous.”
“And pray, Sir, what species of knowledge may that be?” said the lordling, smiling at Lady Aubrey.
“To chastise the insolence of pride, and to make folly feel its own insignificance,” replied my tutor.
“An occupation of infinite toil,” cried the stranger: “pray did you ever practise the lesson you inculcate?”
“I never felt an inclination to try the experiment, till you suggested its necessity,” said Mr. Hanbury. “But if I should find an occasion which will benefit society, I do not fear the result, either morally or religiously.”
“A very refined hypothesis!” cried my adversary. “It seems you are a profound logician.”
“I am fond of exploring truth,” said Mr. Hanbury, “and no less eager in condemning folly.”
[Page 135]
“And what is the punishment you generally inflict?” inquired the visitor.
“Contemptuous silence,” answered my tutor.
“Pray, my dear Lord,” interrupted Lady Aubrey, “do not waste your words in altercation with a pedant; Mr. Hanbury is an adept in the mazes of controversy; for he and I have not agreed on any one point, since the first moment we met.”
“A proof of his ignorance, that admits of no denial,” said Lord Linbourne, bowing affectedly to Lady Aubrey.
“Say rather of my sincerity,” cried Mr. Hanbury: “my respect for Lady Aubrey will never induce me to flatter her opinions, where I believe them to be erroneous.”
“You will have some difficulty in convincing me that Lady Aubrey can err,” replied Lord Linbourne.
[Page 136]
My tutor smiled; “Lady Aubrey is mortal,” cried he.
“Impertinent!” exclaimed her ladyship, “I never heard so rude a remark.” At this moment Lady Aubrey first discovered my dog Chance, who had followed me into her dressingroom. “I hope that animal does not belong to you?” said she, addressing Mr. Hanbury with evident disgust.
“He belongs to Mr. Ainsforth, Madam.”
“Mr. Ainsforth should know, that he is not authorised to bring a dogkennel into my family,” said Lady Aubrey. “It is a sufficient proof of my humanity that I receive him .”
Mrs. Blagden was now desired to drive my faithful friend out of the apartment. I grasped her arm, and struggled to subdue her; but in vain: he was kicked into the gallery, and I followed, where, seating myself on the stairs with my disgraced
[Page 137]
companion, I sought relief from a deluge of tears. Better, thought I, would it have been, to have perished in the ocean, than to live at the mercy of such a tyrant. Mr. Hanbury remained with Lady Aubrey, and I heard a warm altercation, which concluded by his abruptly quitting the apartment.
“Unfeeling woman!” exclaimed my liberal tutor, taking my hand and leading me down the stairs: again we entered the saloon; he threw himself on a sofa, and remained silent during several minutes; at length, with some hesitation, he addressed me: “My dear boy,” said he, “you are very young, but you are already capable of discrimination. You see that Lady Aubrey is proud and ungentle; endeavour to treat her with respect; and, if you are not happy in a very short time, you shall return with me to Glenowen.”
[Page 138]
This soothing language consoled my unutterable affliction, and my full heart repaid him with a sigh of gratitude. Lafond now informed us that the company would soon assemble; and requested that we would remove to the apartment of the maitre d'hotel . Mr. Hanbury rose, and we followed, silent and astonished. Here a new scene of humiliation succeeded: every individual of the household entered the room, one after the other, to gaze at us, and to make observations. They were all foreigners; and though I did not understand their words, I could discover by their gestures that I was an object of universal commiseration. The upraised eyes and significant shrugs of the curious commentators mortified me severely; while Mr. Hanbury, who was perfectly acquainted with the French language, was scarcely able to smother his indignation.
[Page 139]
He observed me, as I sat motionless, and the smile of approbation struggled with a tear of humanity.
Mrs. Blagden broke in upon our reverie, by informing my tutor, that Lady Aubrey was sorry she had not an apartment to offer him in her hotel; “but,” continued she, “I have made up a bed for the boy, and my Lady desires that he may not sit up late.” Mr. Hanbury pressed my arm, and wished me a good night: as I turned from him to attend Mrs. Blagden, he whispered, “Do not forget Glenowen.” I comprehended his meaning, for his kind promise instantly darted across my mind; while it cheered my spirits, and reconciled me to our short separation.
Mrs. Blagden conducted me to my closet, for it had neither chimney nor window: we had passed through a magnificent chamber, where the bed-curtains were drawn close, and every thing was
[Page 140]
silent. On Mrs. Blagden's leaving me in total darkness, she charged me, on pain of Lady Aubrey's displeasure, not to speak, or make the least noise, in the morning, left I should disturb Sir Sidney. At the found of his name, the palpitation of my heart quickened. I could not close my eyes till near daybreak. I listened incessantly, to hear if my cousin was stirring: Mrs. Blagden slept in his apartment, and my busy mind was occupied by a variety of interesting ruminations. I recollected the rich cradle which I had seen at the manor-house, and compared it with the costly silk bed which was now allotted to the happy Sir Sidney. The only consolation which my heart experienced was derived from the consciousness of my personal strength; I felt, that, though I might not be allowed to chastise an insult, I was at least enabled to resist oppression. It was but an unpropitious
[Page 141]
omen, that my earliest thoughts were engaged in forming plans to subdue that being, who was ordained to interest every moment of my existence.
CHAP. IX. Early in the morning, Mrs. Blagden awoke me, and bade me dress myself, in order that I might pass through the adjoining apartment, before Sir Sidney was stirring. With lingering eyes, and loitering steps, I crossed the chamber, eager and longing to behold that rara avis about whom “all the world” was talking: but the curtains were still closed, and his governess having previously commanded me to tread softly, kept her finger on her lip to remind me of her injunction. I descended to the maitre d'hotel's room, where Mr. Hanbury waited to receive me.
[Page 142]
At length the awful moment arrived when we were to meet Sir Sidney Aubrey. We were conducted to his mother's boudoir , where we found her reclined on a sofa, at breakfast: my little cousin was sitting on a cushion by her side: he was, indeed, beautiful! His countenance was fresh and animated; his person well formed, and his eyes expressive of sense and benevolence. He was dressed in a vest and pantaloons of blue silk, which added much to the clearness of his complexion; while the deep glow which mantled over his cheek was contrasted by a profusion of dark auburn hair, falling in natural ringlets on his shoulders. I viewed him with astonishment, till, glancing at a mirror which was placed over the back of the sofa, my admiration was converted into chagrin, for there I beheld myself; clad in a suit of brown fustian, with locks short and
[Page 143]
jetty; and a complexion, as dark as the tablet of my fortune.
My pretty cousin, springing from his seat, on tiptoe stretched his arms about my neck, and cordially embraced me: his kindness cheared my sinking spirits, and reconciled me to myself. He adressed me in French; I could not answer him: Lady Aubrey's emphatic sarcasm seemed the oracle of truth, and I began to think myself “terribly ignorant.” At the moment when I was almost suffocated with confusion, Sir Sidney spoke to me in my native language, and I began, once more, to breathe freely.
Lady Aubrey passed the breakfast hour in conversation with Mr. Hanbury; and in making remarks, which, in spite of the playfulness of infancy, perpetually attracted my attention. She lamented that I was “so clumsy and unfashioned,” and was “certain that nobody would believe I was one of the family;”
[Page 144]
“though,”continued Lady Aubrey, “he is very like his mother, who had a decided antipathy to the graces.”
“I have always heard,” replied Mr. Hanbury, “that Mrs. Ainsforth was a good and an enlightened woman.”
“Poor Penelope!” exclaimed Lady Aubrey, while a fudden and unexpected gloom overspread her features; “you cannot conceive how prettily Walsingham could once recite her epitaph: we used to fit by her tomb whole hours together, and there I taught him to repeat it.”
My mother's tomb! Oh God! what a train of melancholy ideas darted athwart my young mind, at that moment! My mother's tomb! thought I; was it over the very bosom which nourished me into strength, that I used to sport, and play, and frolic, unconscious that she was mouldering beneath my feet? Did I repeat her eulogy with the vacant smile
[Page 145]
of insensibility;and was the spark of nature extinct within my breast, that my eyes beamed gladness, when her's were closed in death? The dark cold grave was her silent resting-place, while her poor offspring bore the bufretings of fortune, and shrunk beneath the tyranny of persecution! I had never known a mother: I had been thrown on the wide world, like a garden flower, transplanted to a desert; all around me was barren, or overrun with weeds! The storm beat heavy on me; I had no shelter but amidst thorns, which, while they screened me from the tempest, wounded and oppressed me! I had never tasted the balmy kiss of maternal fondness, except when I was incapable of appreciating its value. I could not help exclaiming, “Happy, happy Sir Sidney! I wish I had a mother!” when my tears arrested the powers of articulation.
[Page 146]
“Whatever is, is right,”cried Lady Aubrey, who had watched the emotions of my mind, as they were pictured in my face. “If your mother had lived, she would only have made you a pedant.”
“Is Sir Sidney a pedant?” said I, with earnest curiosity, “for I should like to be what he is.”
“I dare say you would,” cried Lady Aubrey; “but you must not encourage such aspiring ideas. They will only, by raising your hopes above your fortune, render your humiliation the greater. I wonder,” added she, looking at Mr. Hanbury, “who has taught the child such pernicious nonsense.”
“I never have been taught at all,” said I, sighing deeply.
“So much the worse,” replied Lady Aubrey, “for arrogance is a thriving weed—”
[Page 147]
“Which generally grows in a barren soil,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury.
My aunt, though somewhat disconcerted, continued:—
“And pray, Walsingham, why would you like to resemble Sir Sidney?”
“Because he is happy,” answered I, “and treated kindly.”
“You have had a subtle tutor,” said Lady Aubrey, “and have learnt your lesson admirably!”
“Mr. Hanbury is my tutor,” answered I.
“Indeed!” cried my aunt, addressing herself to my kind and generous friend, “you are likely, Sir, to have but an unprofitable situation, in being the preceptor of a poor dependant: for I wish you to understand, that I shall not be answerable for his education.”
“To the little I can teach him, he, is welcome,” replied Mr. Hanbury, “and I only lament that my powers are so limited.”
[Page 148]
“I hope you will instruct him in the art of pleasing,” said Lady Aubrey, “for without much complaisance, he is likely to make but a tardy progress in the fashionable world.”
“I do not comprehend your ladyship,” replied Mr. Hanbury: “if you mean by the art of pleasing, the fawning, sycophantic, servile adulation, which only knaves bestow, and none but fools delight in; I trust, he will avoid that complaisance which will debase his nature.”
Lady Aubrey, piqued at the sincerity of the retort, continued:—
“What maxims would you wish to inculcate, where want of fortune is want of every thing? where poverty should place a curb on the imagination, left it should run wild beyond the boundaries of prudence?”
“The unperishable maxims of truth,” replied Mr. Hanbury.
[Page 149]
“Antediluvian!” exclaimed Lady Aubrey. “Why, you should have been preceptor to the Patriarchs. I am sorry for your sake that this conversation was started, for I had some idea of making you private tutor to Sir Sidney:—but I should expire, to see a youth of his fortune and fashion ushered into the great world, like a black-letter edition of Chaucer, for few people to notice; and for nobody to understand.”
“Surely, sincerity cannot be incomprehensible,” said Mr. Hanbury. “It is only deception that is mysterious.”
“That may be true,” replied Lady Aubrey; “but one likes sometimes to be agreeably deceived. Sir Sidney was born to move in the highest sphere, where he will have no occasion for the unadorned qualification of sincerity.”
“True,” answered my tutor, laconically.
[Page 150]
“Besides,”continued Lady Aubrey, yawning with ennui , “I should not permit him to destroy his health by poring over books, which ought long ago to have been buried with their authors. Sir Sidney is of a delicate constitution, and could not support the fatigue of study. It is for this reason that I have chosen Mrs. Blagden for his governess, till he is capable of deciding for himself. There is nothing so dangerous as curbing the spirit of youth: and I am determined that no person shall ever contradict Sir Sidney. Nature shall take her course; she shall unfold his mind progressively: wealth and power will attend his footsteps, and he will find the world ready enough to obey him.”
I listened with earnest attention; and longed to contradict my cousin by way of experiment.
“Will not a female preceptor be somewhat singular?” said Mr. Hanbury.
[Page 151]
“Not at all,” replied Lady Aubrey.
“It is only by the society of women that men become polished and enlightened: I hate your dull scholastic pedant; your animal made up of musty rules, and obsolete opinions;—the very gleaner of scattered maxims, either disowned by their original authors, or condemned, for their insignificance, to moulder in obscurity.”
“What do you call a pedant?” said Mr. Hanbury.
“Why, in the modern acceptation of the word,” answered Lady Aubrey, “a being, who by his taciturnity conceals his ignorance; and by lining his library with black-letter editions, fancies himself a very Mæcenas.”
“Is there no medium between the pedant and the blockhead?” said Mr. Hanbury; “and is it not better to be moderately wise, than singularly dull?”
[Page 152]
“Oh! I doat on singularity!” exclaimed Lady Aubrey. “I would not have my child resemble any thing living for the whole universe!”
“Then let him resemble some of the ancients,” said Mr. Hanbury.
“No; by woman alone can man be rendered amiable,” replied my aunt.
“Perhaps your ladyship approves the doctrines of Chesterfield?” cried Mr. Hanbury.
“Not altogether,” said Lady Aubrey. “The precepts of Chesterfield are generally either useless or criminal. With respect to the manners of a well-bred man, he inculcates nothing more than every well-bred man already practises. As to his system of gallantry, I deem it the most profligate, unprincipled, and prejudicial that ever disgraced the republic of letters. A man, completely fashioned after the model of Chesterfield, must be the bane of society; a
[Page 153]
mere fluttering painted fly, that buzzes in the atmosphere of a court, to dazzle with its gaudy colours, and to sting the unsuspecting fool, who is fascinated by its beauty. No; man only can be polished by woman.”
“But not by every woman,” said my tutor. “I confess there are some, whose judgment and accomplishments qualify them for the important task of unfolding the young mind; but Mrs. Blagden does not exactly answer this description.”
“That may be true,” replied Lady Aubrey; “but I am determined that Sir Sidney shall be an unshackled being. Many a wise head has been spoiled by curbing the exuberance of fancy.”
“But not by improving the heart.” “O! the heart is of little consequence,” said my aunt; “nothing is so easily moulded.”
[Page 154]
“Then do you not dread the impression of a coarse and vulgar model? Do you not tremble,” said Mr. Hanbury, “while you commit the precious yielding composition to the hand that will distort its beauty?”
At this moment Mrs. Blagden entered the room; and, by her glances of indignation, it was easy to discover that she had heard the conversation which had passed. The ascendancy which she had acquired over the mind and actions of Lady Aubrey, was menaced by Mr. Hanbury's rational opinions. She beheld in him a powerful rival; her envy was only to be equalled by her malice, and she determined on revenge, whatever consequences might attend it. A servant announced Lord Linbourne, when my tutor, taking my hand, excused himself and departed. Sir Sidney and Mrs. Blagden went airing in Lady Aubrey's
[Page 155]
carriage, while Mr. Hanbury strolled with me and my dog Chance, towards the environs of Nice.
CHAP. X. We ascended a beautiful eminence, at the summit of which we took our seat on the turf, to contemplate the surrounding scenery, and to converse on what had passed since our arrival. “Walsingham,” said Mr. Hanbury, with a grave and penetrating tone, which vibrated on the heart, “I fear that our situation in Lady Aubrey's family will be wholly insupportable. Distance is the strongest bond of attachment, to minds tinctured with pride, and apt to sicken under the fatigues of hospitality; removed from Lady Aubrey's presence,
[Page 156]
she will, perhaps, remember you with compunction; and compunction may rekindle in her bosom the latent spark of affection, which now seems almost extinguished. We will return to Glenowen;— we will not stoop to the caprice of Lady Aubrey. I will educate you with the zeal of a brother; and where-ever my future destiny may lead me, you shall be the partner of my fortune.”
Never did accents meet my ear so sweetly harmonious! We rose, and continued our walk: I had never, till I met Mr. Hanbury, conversed with any man, except Sir Edward and Mr. Martlet. The boisterous manners of the former, and the terrifying austerity of the latter, formed a striking contrast to the wisdom and urbanity of my new associate. “Remember, you are a man,” was his constant lesson. Every mean and dishonourable propensity was delineated in
[Page 157]
such hideous colours, that to know them was a sufficient warning to avoid them; while truth! sublime and immutable truth! was unfolded to my young imagination in all her beautiful attractions! I loved her; she was my first love: Oh! how many pangs has my enthusiasm caused me! How often has my heart bled with anguish, when I have seen my idol insulted by scorn, or wounded by duplicity.
Mr. Hanbury perceived that his voluntary kindness powerfully impressed my mind. I had scarcely language to thank him, and I was silent, left I should shed tears, which I began to consider as a proof of weakness, incompatible with the true dignity of fortitude. We continued our walk; after a short pause, we conversed on various subjects: the beauties of nature; the wisdom and benevolence of that Power, whose omnipotence filled my bosom with affections infinite!
[Page 158]
The wonders of the creation, as they grew familiar to my eyes, produced less vivid emotions, while, by degrees, they formed a source of settled calm delight, which is the basis of knowledge and the triumph of philosophy.
“With you I shall be happy!” said I cheerfully.
“Your happiness will depend upon yourself,” answered my tutor. “There is nothing perfect, nothing permanent in the lot of humanity. That which we denominate the pain or pleasure of existence, originates in the tenor of the mind, which calculates the instability of either. Wisdom cannot escape the caprices of fortune; beauty is not secure against the poison of adulation; nor can prosperity defend its possessor from the attacks of corporeal suffering. The shafts of vicissitude are perpetually flying round us; virtue and truth may form a shield, but it will not prove invulnerable,
[Page 159]
unless they are unmixed with the soster affections; for life is an ever-varying scene, where the actor alternately demands our smiles and tears. But pity, that is awakened indiscriminately, degrades the human mind below itself, and becomes, at last, a plea for pusillanimity and folly.”
“How am I to know when I ought to pity?” said I. “Must I not pity the unhappy?”
“Explore the cause, before you suffer the effect to influence your judgment or penetrate your heart,” replied Mr. Hanbury. “There are events which, being inherent in our natures, mock the powers of resistance, and convince the wisest of their own fallibility. An enlightened author says, “Let us impose an equal temper on our minds, and pay, without murmuring, the tribute which we owe to humanity. The winter brings cold, and we must freeze. The summer returns
[Page 160]
with heat, and we must melt. The inclemency of the air disorders our health, and we must be sick. Here we are exposed to wild beasts, and there to men more savage than the beasts: and if we escape the inconveniences and dangers of the air and the earth, there are perils by water, and perils by fire. This established course of things it is not in our power to change; but it is in our power to assume such greatness of mind as becomes wise and virtuous men; as may enable us to encounter the accidents of life with fortitude, and to conform ourselves to the order of Nature, who governs the great kingdom, the world, by continual mutations.” 4
“Is it the order of Nature that Sir Sidney should be happier than I?”
“Time only can elucidate that mystery,” answered my tutor. “High fortune is as often productive of misery as
[Page 161]
happiness. The consolations of life wholly rest on the powers of appreciating events, and of discriminating between real and imaginary bliss. It is therefore a matter of doubt with me, whether you will not feel more pure and gratifying delight amidst the solitudes of Glenowen, than Sir Sidney will experience in the highest circles of false refinement.”
This suggestion astonished me. I found a glow of satisfaction mantling through my heart, which almost instantaneously reconciled me to my fortune. Mr. Hanbury had inspired me with that confidence in his understanding, which brought with it an implicit reliance on whatever he asserted. He assured me that I should be more happy in retirement, than in the din and turmoil of life; and he was not capable of misleading my hopes, or bewildering my fancy. He had inculcated truth with the gentleness
[Page 162]
of a friend; it stole into my heart like a kind and welcome guest; it was not forced upon my mind, with an austerity which would have distorted its beauty, and rendered it rather a tyrant than an associate.
From the period of this conversation I began to anticipate the calm and unconstrained delights which I should enjoy among my native mountains. There, thought I, shall I inhale the healthful breezes of morning; wander, uncontrolled, over meadows painted by spring, and persumed by her own sweet breath: loiter beneath umbrageous woods, and muse on the margin of the brook, as it courses swiftly down the rude and craggy slope; there did I hope, in soothing dreams, to behold an opening prospect where all should be richly coloured by the hand of Nature! “When, when shall we return?” interrupted the delicious reverie.
[Page 163]
“As soon as we can form a decisive opinion respecting Lady Aubrey's intentions,” replied my tutor. “Nothing that is done rashly can be done well: we must examine her mind, and draw our inferences from its prominent features. In the mean time let it be your task to treat her with respect, because she was your mother's sister, and your earliest friend.” I promised to obey.
On our return to the hotel, we found a tailor waiting to provide me such clothes as would be proper for the protegée of Lady Aubrey; though I observed that the patterns were of an inferior quality to those worn by Sir Sidney. As Mrs. Blagden was giving orders, my aunt entered the apartment. “Why, Walsingham! you will not know yourself!” exclaimed she, as the tailor presented the pattern-card: “What will you do to repay me for all this kindness?” continued my aunt, in a tone
[Page 164]
of protection that made me blush, though her cheek displayed no conscious suffusion. I could have burnt the patterns, and annihilated the tailor, when with a significant shrug he sighed, “ Pauvre petit! est il malheureux ?” Lady Aubrey, by a glance of contempt, acknowledged his suggestion, which did not offend her pride, because it was proof against pity. After a short pause she continued: “Mind, Walsingham, that you take care of your clothes; and recollect that you cannot have a wardrobe like Sir Sidney: you are not among the mountains now, child.”
“I wish I were!” said I, interrupting her and sighing, “I should then be happy.”
“You see, my Lady,” cried Mrs. Blagden, “what sort of return you are to expect from ignorant and selfish minds. These are lessons of Mr. Hanbury's preaching; he has taught the
[Page 165]
boy, already, to rebel against your counsel.”
“I hope not,” said Lady Aubrey, looking earnestly at my tutor, who only answered with a smile of disdain, which was clearly understood by Mrs. Blagden.
“I am sure,” cried the duenna, “that my Lady is imposed on, for I do not think that this boy at all resembles the child whom we left at Glenowen.” Lady Aubrey started.
“Don't you remember, my Lady, how pretty and lively and entertaining little Walsingham was? Why he was no more like this vulgar brat, than I am like your ladyship,” said Mrs. Blagden.
“You are imposed upon, cheated, and cajoled by some artful designing person who, having heard of your ladyship's generosity, wishes to make a fool of you. Look at the boy,” continued she, turning me round contemptuously, “has he an air of gentility? does he look like
[Page 166]
your nephew? Can any thing be more clumsy or more common than this face and figure? You are deceived, entrapped by artifice; and if you don't take care, will be the laughing-stock of the whole world.”
“It must be so!” exclaimed Lady Aubrey, “and I am the dupe of my own benevolent heart. The child I loved so fondly, and nursed with such attention, was beautiful and animated. I am deceived —this is not Walsingham.”
“Indeed I am Walsingham,” said I, taking her hand and pressing it to my lips. “Look at me; you will, you must remember me. You said but yesterday, that I was like my mother;— have you forgot her too?”
Lady Aubrey's heart seemed to shiver at the question, while tears gushed from my eyes involuntarily.
“A canting story, learnt by rote,” exclaimed Mrs. Blagden; “and I am
[Page 167]
now more fully convinced of the imposture than ever.” She endeavoured to separate me from Lady Aubrey, whose hand I grasped with convulsive agitation.
“Do not send me from you,” said I, “at least till you believe that I am Walsingham.” I fell upon my knees, and held her by the gown; she endeavoured to go; I still hung about her.
“Grieve not, my dear boy,” cried Mr. Hanbury; “tears cannot penetrate through hearts of adamant, and innocence contaminates itself, by soliciting favours from the unworthy. Leave your proud aunt to her mean insidious counsellor, and know how to estimate your own worth, by despising the baseness of your enemy.”
Lady Aubrey quitted the room, followed by Mrs. Blagden and Sir Sidney, who, as he passed me, took my hand, and shook it. I revived, as suddenly as I had become sorrowful. Oh! how vivifying! how grateful to the heart are the
[Page 168]
sympathies of benevolent minds! Rosanna, to you I need not make the comment.
“Am I not Walsingham?” said I, turning towards Mr. Hanbury as they quitted the apartment. “Am I not Lady Aubrey's nephew? the cousin of Sir Sidney? Why am I disowned? what have I done, that they acknowledge me no longer? is it because I am not so handsome as Sir Sidney?”
My tutor could not answer me: his heart was bursting with rage, and throbbing with sensibility, when Lord Linbourne abruptly entered the room.
“Where is Lady Aubrey?” inquired his lordship, with an air of superiority, which Mr. Hanbury's feelings at that moment could not endure.
“Do you hear me?” repeated Lord Linbourne; “where is your Lady?”
“ My Lady,” cried Mr. Hanbury; “thank Heaven! she is no Lady of mine !”
[Page 169]
“The chance is an hundred to ten, that you never serve her equal,” said Lord Linbourne sneeringly.
“Granted; because it is a million to one,” replied Mr. Hanbury, “that she is unequalled ; for, if the human heart was ever impregnated with the malice of a fiend, it is the heart of Lady Aubrey.”
“Sir! I do not comprehend you,” said Lord Linbourne, reddening with the spirit of knight-errantry.
“Shall I repeat my words?” cried Mr. Hanbury calmly; “shall I add my reasons for entertaining such an opinion?”
“I cannot hear Lady Aubrey slandered,” replied Lord Linbourne, “and shall uphold her conduct at all hazards.”
“Whether she be right or wrong?” interrupted my tutor, with contempt; which mortified the young champion of folly.
[Page 170]
“Unquestionably,” said he, reddening.
“On what plea, my Lord?”
“By the laws of good breeding,” answered the angry boy; “a woman of Lady Aubrey's rank in society, has a right to do whatever she thinks proper: she is not amenable to the vulgar, and I will defend her at the peril of my life.”
“In violation of justice and humanity?” said Mr. Hanbury, smiling.
“Those are matters of future consideration,” replied Lord Linbourne. “Any man that presumes to calumniate Lady Aubrey, must draw up his charges with the point of his sword; and, as for justice and humanity, we will leave them to the laws and the surgeon, for the benefit of the survivor.”
“Do you address this jargon to me, my Lord?” cried Mr. Hanbury gravely.
[Page 171]
“To every man breathing,” replied Lord Linbourne, “who attaches disgrace to the name of Lady Aubrey.”
“Then I pronounce her, infamous!” exclaimed my tutor; “the most unfeeling, the most tyrannical, the most unnatural of women! One, who disclaims the innocence that would honour her name, at the same time that she upholds the wretch who will damn it to posterity.”
“Give me some proof,” cried Lord Linbourne; “I shall not credit mere assertion.”
“Here is a living proof, my Lord,” answered Mr. Hanbury, taking my arm. “This boy, the only child of a dear dead sister; thrown on the world, without fortune, and destitute of friends; bred in solitude; wild, innocent, and gentle, as you see him, came hither to receive her friendship; to deserve it; and—”
[Page 172]
“What, sir?”
“She disowns him,” replied my tutor, endeavouring in vain to smother his emotion. “She spurns the little fugitive, and mocks his innocent appeal to her humanity with the most remorseless cruelty. Am I the calumniator of Lady Aubrey? My lord, can you defend her conduct?”
Lafond at this instant summoned Lord Linbourne to Lady Aubrey's dressing-room: as soon as he was gone, the inquisitive valet again entered into conversation with Mr. Hanbury, not without laughing heartily at the chagrin he observed in his countenance. “You are, I see, on the black list already—one of the proscribed,” said Lafond; “my lady's favourite is offended, and a thousand priests will not be able to pray you out of purgatory.” Mr. Hanbury, equally amazed at the effrontery, and bewildered by the incomprehensible language
[Page 173]
of Monsieur Lafond, made no reply; encouraged by his silence the valet proceeded— “You are incredulous as to the conduct of Lady Aubrey; now, if you have a mind to be convinced, I will bring you to the proof of her folly, and you shall hear her full conviction from her own lips. In a small boudoir , adjoining her bed-chamber, you may conceal yourself when she retires to rest. Her favourite is her constant companion, and she never fails to unbosom all the secrets of her heart before she lays her head upon her pillow.”
“What! become a listener! a mean and cowardly spy upon the actions of an abandoned woman!” exclaimed Mr. Hanbury; “and for what purpose?”
“To detect her infamy; to shame her into justice; and to relieve the little Walsingham from her persecutions,” replied Lafond. “Last night by accident I overheard a secret of the most important nature
[Page 174]
—Sir Sidney is not—.” As Lafond uttered these words, Lady Aubrey entered the room; we separated, and the conversation ended.
CHAP. XI. During the remainder of the day my tutor's mind was agitated in the extreme; a variety of painful sensations, all of which were tinctured with resentment and augmented by curiosity, told him, that there was something strangely mysterious in the conduct of Lady Aubrey, and the language of Lafond. At one moment he resolved to avail himself of the situation in which he might convict my aunt from her own mouth; but honour and the laws of propriety condemned the suggestion; and he had not resolution
[Page 175]
to act basely, even in the cause of virtue and humanity.
I was ordered to bed at an earlier hour than usual, and Mr. Hanbury took his leave of Lady Aubrey. The words which Lafond had uttered strongly impressed my imagination; and I resolved, if possible, to discover their tendency. For this purpose I stole from my closet, passed Sir Sidney's apartment, and, unseen, arrived at the boudoir which led to Lady Aubrey's chamber. I now began to reproach myself for the mean and degrading curiosity which brought me thither; but it was too late to retreat, and the idea that I should discover that which would “rescue the little Walsingham from persecution,” reconciled me to my situation, and augmented my impatience.
Shortly after I had taken my stand near the door of Lady Aubrey's apartment, I heard her enter with Mrs. Blagden. My heart palpitated with fear and
[Page 176]
expectation, when they began to converse on the various occurrences of the day. “Why did your ladyship send for the child at all,” cried Mrs. Blagden; “even supposing that he is your nephew?”
“To place him in some obscure part of France,” replied my aunt: “it was dangerous to leave him at Glenowen; his mother's virtues are still fresh in memory, and the world will at least expect some degree of attention on my part to the only child of such a sister. Here he will be unknown; and as he does not bear the name of the family, he can never disgrace it.”
“But the paper which is of so much importance—” cried Mrs. Blagden.
“Is safe in my ivory cabinet at Glenowen,” answered Lady Aubrey. “The haste and perturbation with which we departed would not admit of my depositing it in a more secure situation; and
[Page 177]
I have never dared to entrust my keys with any person who might convey it to me.”
“It should have been destroyed,” said Mrs. Blagden. “There is no hope of success in half measures, where the origin of them is of a desperate nature.”
“Such was my meaning,” replied Lady Aubrey; “but the villany of the deed arrested my hand, and I was at least deterred from that enormity.”— Her voice was tremulous, as though she shuddered.
“Well, it is too late to think of it now!” said Mrs. Blagden, sighing— “The boy is in your power, and you must not part with him. But we should speedily contrive means to dismiss his insolent companion: Mr. Martlet must have been either a fool or a knave to select such a person for such an occasion. He is too prying an observer for
[Page 178]
our purpose—he has an interest in this boy's welfare which we are not aware of.”
“I think as you do, Blagden,” answered Lady Aubrey; “but we must proceed with infinite caution; any violent or precipitate conduct on my part would awaken his suspicion, and interest him more than ever in Walsingham's favour. Mr. Hanbury is a shrewd pedant; we are but women.”
Friends! Devils! thought I, trembling with agitation.
“I wish the boy were in heaven with his mother,” said Mrs. Blagden; “for he will only live to plague you, and to disgrace her memory.”
“Oh! do not name his mother,” exclaimed Lady Aubrey, “lest I should forget my obligations to you, and relent in favour of her ill-fated offspring. We will talk further on the subject to-morrow— I am not in a humour to decide
[Page 179]
on any thing at present; therefore, leave me.”
Mrs. Blagden muttered a reply which betrayed her discontent and silenced Lady Aubrey: they parted, and I heard the duenna ascend the stairs to Sir Sidney's chamber. It was impossible for me to return to my closet without her seeing me; therefore I threw myself gently on the carpet, and resolved to pass the night in my place of concealment. A thousand conscious reproaches smote my heart when I recollected my situation; lurking like a mean and despicable spy under the very roof that afforded me a shelter. It was the first action of my life that degraded my mind, and I detested my own conduct, even more than I despised Mrs. Blagden's. Determining to throw myself on the mercy of Lady Aubrey, I rose hastily, and was endeavouring to find the door of her appartment, when my
[Page 180]
feet were suddenly arrested by the sound of footsteps in her chamber.
I concluded that Lady Aubrey was still awake, and, led on by compunction which was poignant and irresistible, I rushed into her apartment: but how shall I describe my consternation when I heard Lady Aubrey shriek, and beheld her sinking, overwhelmed with confusion, into the arms of Lord Linbourne? My situation was undescribable.
I fell upon my knees, and conjured her to forgive me: I wept aloud, and every moment expected to receive my death from the Viscount's sword, which lay on Lady Aubrey's toilette. My surprise was augmented by the conduct of those from whom I expected nothing less than annihilation: they soothed and embraced me; offered to bribe my fecresy; and promised to reward me with every kindness if I would not reveal what I then saw. “If you tell that
[Page 181]
you found Lord Linbourne in my chamber,” said Lady Aubrey with a faultering voice, and a countenance pale as a spectre; “if you reveal it, even to your tutor Mr. Hanbury, I will discard you for ever; you shall be banished from my affections while living and die at last a miserable beggar.” I shuddered, and wept more violently than before. “But,” continued my aunt, “if you never disclose this affair to any person whatever, you shall find me your friend, your affectionate protectress, till the last hour of your existence.” At this moment I heard Mrs. Blagden descending from her apartment, and presently followed a gentle tap at Lady Aubrey's chamber door; Lord Linbourne concealed himself beneath the toilette, and my virtuous aunt, with an unruffled tone and a countenance of assumed surprise, demanded her reason for returning.
[Page 182]
Lady Aubrey was an expert deceiver; her finesse was more than equal to the low subtlety of her tyrannical counsellor: an excuse was framed, and alleged, with the promptitude of a practised imagination; she informed Mrs. Blagden, that I had fallen asleep in her boudoir ; and, that, on waking, my surprize and fear of offending excited that distress which had probably drawn her from her chamber. “Here,” said Lady Aubrey, “take the poor fellow to his bed; for, Heaven knows, I sincerely forgive him.” I reluctantly gave my hand, and suffered her to lead me.
As Mrs. Blagden led me out of the apartment, I looked earnestly towards the toilette which concealed Lady Aubrey's lover. She observed my thoughts, as my eyes revealed them, and loaded me with caresses till I reached the door. I had made no promise to keep the secret; but I did not love Mrs. Blagden
[Page 183]
well enough to honour her with my confidence, and we ascended the stairs together in sullen silence, till we entered Sir Sidney's chamber; when her patience could no longer restrain her indignation, and all the malice of her heart burst forth against me.
“My Lady is might fond all of a sudden,” cried she: “What artful tricks have you been playing, to win her affections so rapidly? Tell me the cause of this change in her behaviour,” continued Mrs. Blagden, growing scarlet with anger, clenching her hands, and stamping vehemently.
“I will not tell you,” answered I sternly; “she charged me to keep it a secret.”
“What then there is a secret?” cried the inquisitor with augmented rage. “Those who keep some, shall in future keep all; for I will be her dupe no longer.” So saying, she whirled me
[Page 184]
into my closet, and left me to ruminate on the adventures of the night.
From this hour I knew that I had little kindness to expect from the enraged duenna; for Mrs. Blagden was one of those mortals, who, living under the command of a tyrant, exercised a petty system of oppression on all whom chance had placed within the pale of her jurisdiction. Thus, despotism is the parent of despotism; and, from an instinctive love of sway, every human being is, more or less, the tyrant of his fellow. Though inclination to rule is unquestionably a vice, when inordinately exemplified, it is certainly a vice inherent to every bosom that breathes. The beasts, the fowl, the scaly inhabitants of the waters, prey upon each other; and the first propensity of infancy proves, by the little rage which bursts forth on the slightest contradiction, the longing to resist, and the inclination to vanquish.
[Page 185]
CHAP. XII. My gay apparel was brought home, and I was, to use Lady Aubrey's expression, at last, “fit to be seen.” A morning concert was the theatre of my debut ; where, as soon as I made my appearance, an universal murmur overwhelmed me with confusion: every eye was turned upon me, and every tongue uttered an ejaculation of pity. “Poor little fellow! How kind Lady Aubrey is!” echoed on every side. I often directed my inquiring glances towards Mr. Hanbury, who never failed to meet them with a smile of encouragement. How amiable, how exalted did this unsophisticated being appear, when placed in comparison with the nothings that surrounded him! By degrees I drew nearer and nearer, till I seated myself
[Page 186]
beside him; and while the fluttering tribes of folly buzzed their senseless jargon, I stole a busy moment, and inquired, “When shall we return to Glenowen?”
Lady Aubrey kept her eyes constantly upon me, and every word that I whispered, during the morning, called a blush upon her cheek which shame, more than modesty, excited. She appeared to be the most miserable of the human race; in the midst of splendour, conscious of guilt, and fearful of detection. Her countenance was agitated, her hand trembled, her lip quivered, whenever she attempted to speak: still watching me with a mixture of apprehension and pride, which combined to torture her bosom incessantly. I could not help commiserating her feelings; she is guilty, thought I, and she is sufficiently punished.
[Page 187]
The music had long been interrupted by the trifling gabble of the company, when a new object of attraction entered the room: it was a fashionable female, dressed like the high-priestess of a Turkish haram. The perfumes of Arabia scented the air as she fluttered through the room; and the general display of complaiance which she manifested to all, excluded every one present from the vanity of individual attention. She walked in a mincing step; prattled in a small and affected tone; smiled without meaning; and was grave, without being thoughtful. I had never seen any thing at all like her: her mien, her dress, and her language, were new to me. She was attended by a French girl about twelve years of age, whom she had taken under her protection, to wait on her lap-dog. Mademoiselle Julie de Beaumont was the daughter of an eminent literary character; but being left
[Page 188]
at an early age wholly under the care of a mercenary and distant relation, chance threw her in the way of seeing the world, and she became the humble dependant of Lady Emily Delvin.
The young and innocent Julie attracted universal attention. She was gay, sensible, well-bred, and beautiful. Her exalted patroness seemed to envy the juvenile graces of her timid èleve; and, by repeated looks of coldness and reproof, never failed to check the imagination and awe the bosom, which depended wholly on her smiles for protection and repose.
The little favourite, which Mademoiselle de Beaumont carried in her arms, I instantly concluded to be the rival of my faithful Chance. My bosom panted with indignation; I could scarcely restrain my tongue; every nerve in my diminutive frame quivered with resentment. Sir Sidney was seated on a sofa
[Page 189]
near me, attended by Mrs. Blagden; Lady Emily was advancing towards them, when feeing me, she started back and exclaimed, “Heavens! Lady Aubrey, where did you find this little negro?” My wrath began to master my discretion, when Mrs. Blagden replied, courtesying and smiling, “He is a poor little Welch mountaineer, my Lady; born on the manor of Glenowen, and dependent on the bounty of Lady Aubrey.”
“Has the queer little wretch no relations?” cried Lady Emily.
“Yes,” said I, firmly. “Lady Aubrey is my aunt, and Sir Sidney is my cousin.” A blow from the clenched hand of the stern duenna nearly levelled me with the ground, when Mr. Hanbury darted forward, and rescued me from her violence.
“Really, madam,” said my tutor, “this severity is ill-timed. The boy
[Page 190]
only uttered truth, and had he done otherwise I should have despised him.”
“You have made him insolent,” cried Mrs. Blagden; “and now you think it necessary to defend the ingratitude you taught him.”
“Nothing can be more natural,” cried Lady Emily, “than self-love. If this be the boy's tutor, he is, in fact, the aggressor;—the parent of those errors which his judgment is not yet capable of correcting.
“If sincerity can be called error,” replied Mr. Hanbury, “I shall be proud indeed, when my precepts are so termed. Mr. Ainsforth is a pupil that will never disgrace his preceptor, however his poverty may mortify the pride of his family.”
“Tolerably sarcastic for a Welch student!” cried Lady Emily.
“Wonderfully impertinent for a dependent!” exclaimed Lord Linbourne.
[Page 191]
“ Mais, monsieur !” whispered a French petit maitre, “vous avez tort!”
“Sir,” replied my tutor, while provocation almost defeated philosophy, “if I were wrong, I am not disposed to tolerate reprehension from those whom I despise.” A loud laugh followed, and Lady Aubrey, whose rage had been with difficulty kept silent, requested Mr. Hanbury not to trouble her friends, or interrupt the music with his ill-judged observations.
“'Tis time, indeed,” added Lord Linbourne, “that we should have something like harmony. The music may begin: I will take care to keep the preceptor quiet.”
“Place a guard upon your own tongue, my Lord,” said Mr. Hanbury, “if you mean to prevent discord.” Lord Linbourne hummed the first movement of a concerto, but made no reply. During the music, Lady Emily and the
[Page 192]
Viscount amused themselves by affecting a primness of manner, joined to a look of demure ridicule, evidently assumed to mortify my tutor.
The concert being ended, Lord Linbourne approached Mr. Hanbury, and with a supercilious sneer begged leave to congratulate him on his good behaviour. “Upon my soul, Sir, you were most unharmoniously inclined,” cried his lordship; “but they say that music has been known to quiet even the ferocity of brutes.”
“Had Orpheus played no better than you talk, my Lord, the brutes had never listened,” replied Mr. Hanbury.
“Music has charms to soothe the savage breast!” repeated Lady Emily.
Again a titter went round the room; my tutor grew pale with resentment, and, with a look of marked contempt, pronounced, “Ephemera!”
[Page 193]
“Ha! comical enough!” said Lord Linbourne.
“Extremely conceited!” added Lady Emily Delvin.
I now heard Lord Linbourne whisper to a sensible-looking man, who had just entered the room, and who knew nothing of the original cause for discontent, “Let us badger him.”
“Badger whom?” cried the stranger.
“This young prig of a tutor,” replied the Viscount. “He has been confoundedly insolent, and deserves chastisement.”
Mr. Hanbury rose abruptly to quit the room; as he passed Lord Linbourne he said in a low voice, “I shall call on you in half an hour, to receive what I deserve; and I request you to remember; my Lord, that I shall not let you off quietly.”
I accompanied my tutor to his hotel, where he wrote several letters hastily; but before they were sealed, a servant announced Mr. M'Arthur, whom Mr.
[Page 194]
Hanbury instantly recognized as the last person he had seen enter the room at Lady Aubrey's.
“Pardon me, Mr. Hanbury,” said the stranger, “if I wish to hear an explanation of this unfortunate misunderstanding. Lord Linbourne is young and volatile; Lady Aubrey vain and mischievous; you must not endanger your own life, or stigmatize his lordship's reputation, for a little boyish raillery.”
“Sir, I am very awkwardly situated,” replied my tutor calmly; “Lady Aubrey's conduct is peculiarly indelicate.”
“I comprehend you,” said Mr. M'Arthur. “You mean to say that she is your patroness. Do you owe any serious obligations to her ladyship?”
“Why do you ask the question?” cried Mr. Hanbury.
“Because I wish them to be cancelled, before I presume to give you counsel.”
[Page 195]
“Supposing I have not the means,” said my tutor, “am I to bear the insolence of pride, because my sense of injury is superior to my fortune? Or, is the memory of benefits received to deaden the heart against the stings of persecution, till that which originates in gratitude degenerates into cowardice.”
“Certainly not,” replied Mr. M'Arthur; “my credit is at your disposal; for, as in every other respect you seem to be Lord Linbourne's superior, I should blush to behold you dependent on an enemy, who is only invested with power by the caprices of fortune. To be explicit, Mr. Hanbury, I came hither to serve you; it has been an invariable rule with me, to take up arms against oppression; to resist the arrogance of pride; and to contemn the impertinence of folly.”
“Know then,” answered Mr. Hanbury, “that my father is under obligations
[Page 196]
to Lady Aubrey, though I am not: this youth is her nephew; I am his protector.” He then related all that had passed previous to, and at the concert.
“You must not fight Lord Linbourne,” said Mr. M'Arthur, whom I now discovered to be the Viscount's preceptor.
“No,” repeated I, “he shall not fight him, but I will; and Lady Dickens's lap-dog into the bargain.”
My tutor smiled, and bade me be silent. Mr. M'Arthur continued: “The Viscount is in some measure under my guardianship during his travels. I am answerable for his indiscretions: will you accept my excuses?”
“On no account whatever,” replied Mr. Hanbury.
“What will satisfy you?”
“An apology from Lord Linbourne.”
“Nothing less?”
[Page 197]
“Nothing, Sir,” replied my tutor.
“If your young friend has to boast some adventitious claims, I too profess a nice discrimination betwixt the gifts of chance and the advantages of nature. The sense of honour, the proud superiority of rectitude, is not to be subdued by the glare of false magnificence. Let Lord Linbourne divest himself of that haughty demeanour which tarnishes his ancestry, and meet me on the open ground of equality. You shall then judge our cause; and I pledge my honour, against the Viscount's nobility, to abide by your decision.”
“Lord Linbourne will not apologize,” replied Mr. M'Arthur. “I am certain he will not.”
“Then he shall repair the injury he has offered to my honour, or I will perish,” cried my tutor.
“And I will be your second,” said the liberal preceptor. “Name your
[Page 198]
hour and weapons, and suffer me to be the bearer of your challenge.”
“You! are you not his preceptor?” said Mr. Hanbury.
“And therefore bound to reprobate his conduct,” replied Mr. M'Arthur. “I travel with Lord Linbourne to cultivate his mind, and not to countenance his vices. I am his friend, and not his vassal; his counsellor, but not his sycophant. I feed no destructive passions, by administering to his follies; I sanction no crimes, by winking at their progress. Lord Linbourne, if he wanted a pander under the plausible title of a tutor, should have chosen one of those pliant vicious reptiles who would enervate his mind by catering like a voluptuary. I cannot stoop to court the smiles of infamy; or stand like a coward, a tame looker on, while a fellow-creature sinks in the vortex of dissipation, a victim
[Page 199]
for knaves to mock, and fools to pity.”
Mr. M'Arthur left the room, and Mr. Hanbury finished a letter which he had begun to Lady Aubrey, recommending me to her protection. He then sealed those which he had before written, and embracing me, with tears in his eyes, desired a servant to conduct me to my aunt's hotel. My fears suggested all that was terrible. I conjured him to follow soon; he promised to do what was right; and, with a bursting heart, I quitted the apartment.
Lady Aubrey dined with Lady Emily Delvin. Mrs. Blagden was gone to take the air with Sir Sidney; I stole with my faithful Chance to my dark closet, and throwing myself on the bed, with my harmless associate, relieved my afflicted bosom by a torrent of tears.
My situation had frequently been insupportable under Lady Aubrey's roof,
[Page 200]
had I not found a companion in my dog Chance, whose instinct evinced a degree of attachment, doubly gratifying, amidst the persecutions of pride. With him I had often stole from the buz of uninteresting conversation, and sported away the melancholy hours; while he played a thousand tricks to entertain and cheer me. Next to my tutor, Chance put forward his claim to my affections, for it is not the consequence or the species of attachment that winds about the heart; it is the proportion in which the mind is solaced, that endears the comforter; and I could love that tree which sheltered me from the tempest, that wave which would cast me safe upon the sandy beach, or that bank where I had reposed and dreamed of happiness, as though they were objects warmed by vitality, or animated by reason. Ask not the sensual bosom, Rosanna, whether I am right: ask not the pedant, the sophist, or the
[Page 201]
philosopher: but if you with to ascertain the truth of my assertion, turn from the artificial scenes of life,—and ask the child of nature!
CHAP. XIII. As evening advanced, I stole down stairs, to the drawing-room, where I found Lady Aubrey in the most violent perturbation. A note from Mr. M'Arthur was shortly after delivered to her, informing her that the rencontre had taken place, and that Mr. Hanbury was dangerously wounded. The intelligence almost annihilated me: I intreated that some one might conduct me to him. “He requests to see Mr. Ainsforth,” said the messenger. Lady Aubrey consented to my departure, and I hastened to my tutor with all possible expedition.
[Page 202]
I found him shot in the arm; but, as the ball had been extracted on the field, there was every reason to hope that the wound would not prove fatal. In the course of a fortnight, he was sufficiently recovered to make Lady Aubrey's hotel his habitation; for, during his confinement, she had not failed to visit him daily, and to sit by his bed-side whole hours together. Mr. M'Arthur was also a constant inquirer, from whom we learnt, that Lord Linbourne had transferred his assiduities to Lady Emily Delvin, and, since the rencontre with Mr. Hanbury, had wholly withdrawn himself from the society of Lady Aubrey. From this circumstance it was evident that her attentions to Mr. Hanbury were meant only to excite the jealousy of his antagonist: but the gentle offices of even a feigned attachment, sometimes prove dangerous experiments; and those who have encouraged the sentiment of compassion,
[Page 203]
frequently find it a term synonymous with love.
One day, during Mr. Hanbury's confinement, I entered his chamber abruptly, and found Lady Aubrey sitting near his pillow. My tutor had passed a restless night, with symptoms of delirium; and his fever had increased to a degree that was alarming. Lady Aubrey seemed wholly insensible of my approach, and frequently addressed Mr. Hanbury in terms of the most ardent affection. She reproached herself for having been the origin of his danger, and assured him that in case he should recover, her conduct should convince him of her sincere contrition. Her warm and unbounded professions of regard were sealed by an unequivocal bond: she kissed his hand, and sighed with more than common tenderness. I was delighted by her kindness, and availed myself of her good humour, to demand a similar proof of
[Page 204]
affection; she started, and with evident confusion complied with my request.
In proportion as Mr. Hanbury grew into favour, Mrs. Blagden became peevish and discontented. During the periods that the invalid was desired to sleep, it was my custom to throw myself on my bed, and to wait, with silent solicitude, for his hour of waking. Mr. Hanbury had been the inmate of Lady Aubrey's mansion only a few days, when, as I lay in my closet adjoining Sir Sidney's nursery, I heard my aunt and Mrs. Blagden in earnest conversation.
“Your motives, my Lady, respecting Mr. Hanbury, are evident,” said the vindictive gouvernante ; “and I am determined not to hold a second situation in your family. My conscience has long reproached me, and it is time that its burden should be removed.”
“You are not, you cannot be capable of such a deed!” replied Lady Aubrey.
[Page 205]
“You know that I have already engaged to give you five thousand pounds, as soon as the child shall be of age; I have secured it to your heirs; what more can you wish?”
“To quit your ladyship's service,” answered Mrs. Blagden, “unless your new favourite is sent to England: I have no idea of being governed by any one, when I consider the right I have to be the first in this family.”
“You shall be the first, my dear Blagden,” said Lady Aubrey, endeavouring to sooth her: “Heaven knows how much I esteem you; and how happy I shall be to render you every benefit in my power. But you must not leave me; indeed you must not.”
“Then discard your new counsellor,” replied the duenna; “I have a young nephew too, and your ladyship knows it; he wants that which you throw away upon a vagabond.”
[Page 206]
“He shall have any thing that I can command,” said Lady Aubrey. “You know, Blagden, that my jointure is not large, and that when my child shall be of age, I shall have nothing else at my disposal. The income allowed for Sidney's education has been equally shared between us; and you have hitherto been satisfied.”
“I must return to England,” cried the rapacious confidante . “I have a brother settling in a profitable business; he wants four hundred pounds, and I must call in money, which I have placed at interest, to assist him.”
“You shall have four hundred pounds,” replied Lady Aubrey: “I will write to my banker, and he shall send it to your brother.”
Mrs. Blagden having gratified her avarice, again recurred to the first object of her hatred: “I hope, my Lady, that you will order Mr. Hanbury back to
[Page 207]
Glenowen without delay. The world begins to talk about your conduct; and some people have even said that you intend to marry him. Now if that be the case, I shall not think myself bound to—”
“Ridiculous!” interrupted Lady Aubrey; “can you suppose me capable of such folly?—Marry the son of a poor Welsh curate!”
“Perhaps your ladyship means to do worse,” said Mrs. Blagden.
“Heavens!” exclaimed Lady Aubrey; “can you entertain such an opinion of me?”
“Then send him to England,” vociferated the inveterate harpy. “He shall not domineer while I am present; I will not shut my eyes for every beggar to rob me of my right. I will no longer bear the degradation of submitting to such upstarts.”
Lady Aubrey conjured her to be patient; and consoled her by a thousand
[Page 208]
kind and gentle promises of future favour. I was astonished at the insolence of Mrs. Blagden, and still more at the meek submission of the haughty Lady Aubrey: but there is scarcely a poison which has not its antidote, and guilt will never fail to find its own scorpion to punish and torment it.
They now muttered low, and I ventured forth from my closet: on opening the door I beheld Lady Aubrey on her knees before Mrs. Blagden. “He shall go, I promise you; by all that is sacred, he shall go immediately,” said Lady Aubrey with earnest agitation.—At the sight of me they started—I took advantage of their confusion, hastened to Mr. Hanbury, and told him that I had found my aunt in an agony of tears, and kneeling before Mrs. Blagden. Lady Aubrey soon after entered the room, and the conversation was interrupted.
[Page 209]
I drew close by her chair to examine her eyes; they were red with weeping. I longed to ask her why she was kneeling to Mrs. Blagden, but the fear of offending my tutor restrained my tongue, and nothing further was then said on the subject. I quitted the chamber, and flew to find the inexorable governess; she was in the nursery with Sir Sidney; my refentment was not to be appeased; my curiosity demanded some explanation why Lady Aubrey, whose proud and overbearing mind spurned every other restraint, should be the mean and crouching suppliant of such a fiend as Mrs. Blagden. On entering the nursery, I briefly demanded the reason of her conduct, and asked her what right she had to send my tutor back to Glenowen. “My aunt loves him dearly,” said I, “better than she loves you, a thousand thousand times.”— “Indeed! who told you so?” cried Mrs. Blagden, while her eyes
[Page 210]
flashed vengeance, and her cheek grew white with malice.
“Why she told him so herself—I heard her—and she promised to love him for ever, and she kissed his hand; and she kissed me too,” said I with a tone of honest exultation.
“Pretty doings!” exclaimed Mrs. Blagden; “it is no wonder that I am out of favour: but all the world shall know it.” So saying she darted out of the room, and left me to reflect on the imprudence of my conduct.
Though Mrs. Blagden was in a subordinate situation in the family, she was, in fact, a personage of infinite importance. Even the resisting spirit of Lady Aubrey submitted to her guidance; and the entire management of Sir Sidney was entrusted to her judgment and discretion. Thus have we often seen the mightiest rulers governed by weak and ignorant favourites, who, by that cunning
[Page 211]
which is the associate of vulgar minds, can defeat the wisest counsels and over-rule the most enlightened opinions.
During Mr. Hanbury's slow recovery I was only permitted to discourse with Sir Sidney at short periods, and those under the lynx-like watchfulness of the she-dragon who guarded him. Even when the little hour of social intercourse was allowed, my lively effusions were fettered by a thousand cold and useless ceremonies, every one of which was degrading to my nature. I was desired never to contradict Sir Sidney; never to interrupt him when speaking; never to call him cousin, or to refuse obeying whatever he should think proper to command. Sir Sidney was amiable, and would have been the delight of my bosom, had nature been permitted to take place of compulsion; but the stern authority which enforced obedience, chilled the young buds of friendship
[Page 212]
and esteem, as the nipping frost withers the infant blossoms of the year, which a fostering sun might have nourished to perfection.
It was Sir Sidney's daily custom to take the air in Lady Aubrey's carriage with Mrs. Blagden. Mr. Hanbury being nearly recovered, we also dedicated the morning to exercise, less luxurious, and more suited to our fortune. It was in one of these rambles that we were suddenly alarmed by shrieks of distress, and, looking round, we observed a carriage rapidly advancing along the road without a driver. On a nearer approach I percieved Sir Sidney extending his little arms from the window, while Mrs. Blagden uttered screams that penetrated my heart. What was to be done? They were hastening towards destruction! For, at the end of the lane, an abrupt angle presented a dreadful and perpendicular precipice.
[Page 213]
At this terrible moment I recollected a gate which terminated the road, and darted across the corner of a field which led to it, with velocity scarcely human. But what were my horrors when I beheld the gate wide open, while the affrighted horses pursued their career on full speed. Still I flew with the swistness of the wind; my limbs seemed light as gossamer; and my heart beat time to the expedition of my feet. Mr. Hanbury kept his way along the lane in hopes of overtaking the carriage; but I reached the gate before him, just in time to close it, and to arrest the progress of the horses. My joy was convulsive. I laughed, shrieked, jumped, and clapped my hands for several moments. Sir Sidney was released from the carriage; and Mrs. Blagden, as soon as the danger was over, fainted.
I threw my arms about my little cousin, while a copious shower of tears expressed
[Page 214]
my rapture. Mr. Hanbury was pale and unable to speak. My secondary anxiety was for the safety of the coachman, for Mrs. Blagden excited but little emotion in my bosom. In a few minutes the object of my solicitude came running towards us, having only been thrown from his seat by a sudden jolt, and being entirely unhurt by the fall.
Mr. Hanbury then led me to the margin of the precipice; it was terrible to behold—so steep, so profound, that the cattle, grazing in the dell below, seemed more than half diminished by the expanse of intervening air, while every thing like sound was lost in the dreadful and precipitate abyss; my head became giddy with contemplating the scene, my heart sickened, my blood seemed to curdle in my cheek.— “There,” said Mr. Hanbury, pointing to the valley, fathoms down the dreadful chasm, “there would have
[Page 215]
been the grave of Sir Sidney, had not your courage saved him.” I shuddered at the recollection of his danger; I wept tears of joy when I beheld him snatched from destruction: the sensations of my heart were too poignant; Mr. Hanbury perceived their conflict, and led us back to Mrs. Blagden.
We found her perfectly recovered— the coachman had resumed his seat—and the terrified governess, with Sir Sidney, returned home to relate the adventure; my cousin requested that Chance might accompany him, and with some reluctance I consented. The emblazoned vehicle, which had been an object of admiration almost amounting to envy, I now considered as a dangerous and insignificant luxury. “You have witnessed an example, my dear Walsingham,” said my tutor, “that the greatest splendours are not always the most productive of safety.” Though my
[Page 216]
own observation had suggested the idea, I was nevertheless pleased to hear it confirmed by Mr. Hanbury's opinion; and we conversed on the subject till we arrived at Lady Aubrey's hotel.
CHAP. XIV. “ Who is there among us,” says Cicero, “that has been instructed with any care, that is not highly delighted with the sight, or even the bare remembrance of his preceptor and the place where he was taught?” Every sentiment which memory has engraved upon my heart confirms this opinion; and, to the tutor of my infancy does that heart daily offer up a prayer of gratitude and affection. Deprived of one dear parent, and estranged from the other, deserted by Lady Aubrey, snarled
[Page 217]
at by the domestics at Glenowen, I was a stranger to happiness till Mr. Hanbury afforded me his protection. In his kindness I found the affections of a parent, the zeal of a friend, and the assiduity of a preceptor. I felt a combination of gratitude and respect interwoven with every fibre of my heart; and though the gaudy scenes of life have passed before my eyes, like the warm tints of declining day, and, like them, faded to oblivion; the earliest dawn of reason, though clouded by misfortune, remains fresh in my memory, as though it were still present. I remember its dark and lowering aspect; and that the only ray of consolation which gleamed through the sombre perspective originated in the warm and fostering smiles of my benevolent tutor. To his enlightened maxims I owe the few flowers which nature implanted, but which he called forth to decorate my bosom.—
[Page 218]
Alas, Rosanna! they only bloomed, like all my vain delusive hopes, to perish.
The pleasure which I felt in rescuing Match'em and my faithful Chance, could scarcely be termed a sensation, when compared with the delight of having saved a fellow-creature from destruction. Yes, my gentle friend, before I had strength or thought to act in my own defence, I had preserved the life of Sidney Aubrey! The recollection would have cheered my path through this wilderness of sorrow—would have proved an antidote to all the poisons of a contaminating world—could I have whispered to my lacerated bosom, I preserved him to be happy!
Lady Aubrey received her child with rapturous affection. She clasped him to her heart, and kissed him with all a mother's fondness. But the joy which palpitated in her bosom scarcely allowed her the power of reflection, when, turning
[Page 219]
towards me, she exclaimed, “Cruel and unnatural boy! what had your little cousin done to provoke such malice? Had not you frightened the horses, my Sidney's life would not have been endangered.” It was in vain that Mr. Hanbury explained the nature of the accident; in vain that I assured Lady Aubrey of my innocence: Mrs. Blagden had suggested the idea, and her voice was considered as the oracle of wisdom.
“Yet hear me, Lady Aubrey,” said Mr. Hanbury.
“It is to no purpose that you endeavour to exculpate the cruel monster,” interrupted Mrs. Blagden; “I am certain that my lady will not dispute my word: if I am not to be believed in such a trifling matter, the sooner I quit Lady Aubrey's family the better.”
“Do you call that trifling which endangers one person's life and wounds the
[Page 220]
feelings of another?” said my tutor. “Do you call that truth or justice which would stigmatize an innocent boy, and estrange him from the bosom that is bound to foster him?”
“By what law is Lady Aubrey bound to provide for a beggarly relation?” cried Mrs. Blagden.
“By the law of nature,” replied Mr. Hanbury; “where that relation is an honour to his lineage, and promises to be the pride of humanity. But,” continued my tutor with stern indignation, “I can pity Lady Aubrey, when I recollect that she is under the control of such a monitress!”
“My Lady! do you authorize this upstart to insult me?” vociferated Mrs. Blagden. “Is this the treatment I am to experience for having so long—--”
“No, no,” interrupted Lady Aubrey, trembling and alarmed, “I do
[Page 221]
not authorize any one to affront you; and I am sure that Mr. Hanbury is too liberal to insult a woman.”
“Well!” exclaimed the governess, “was there ever the like? to defend the insolent wretch who has disputed my word, and called me infamous names! But I see how it is, my Lady; therefore, let those who give you counsel keep your secrets; and since you do not credit my assertions—--”
“I do; I do credit every thing you say,” replied the intimidated Lady Aubrey, taking her hand, and soothing her.
“Is it possible?” cried Mr. Hanbury.
“It is more than possible,” said Mrs. Blagden; “it is certain. The little devil had his motives. He always envied his beautiful cousin, and hoped by this experiment to destroy him.”
I stood like one that was thunderstruck! My consternation took from me the powers of speech.
[Page 222]
“See how he stands, petrified with conscious guilt!” continued my accuser.
“He would have been happy had he murdered his poor cousin.”
I shrieked, and throwing myself on the ground, burst into an agony of tears. Accused of meditating murder—the murder of the amiable Sidney! My agony was unutterable.
Again Mr. Hanbury attempted to expostulate; and again he was interrupted by Mrs. Blagden. “Spare your fine speeches,” said she; “'tis evident the boy has a wicked heart; you had better consign him to obscurity, for he will only disgrace his family.”
“Ah! let us go,” said I, sobbing.
“You shall go,” continued the tutoress; “you shall not remain under this roof to betray my lady—to tell your artful tales, and to expose her weakness.” As she pronounced these words a sudden
[Page 223]
suffusion covered the cheek of the conscious Lady Aubrey; she looked earnestly at me, and muttering “Infamous little wretch!” hung her head, overpowered with confusion. The pause of silence which followed, gave new vigour to Mrs. Blagden's rage; till Mr. Hanbury, no longer able to endure her insults, quitted Lady Aubrey's hotel, taking me with him, and resolving, on the following morning to set out for England.
A new source of grief now presented itself, and I began to think that there was no period to my vexations. Sir Sidney had taken such a fancy to my favourite, Chance, that Lady Aubrey insisted on our leaving him behind us. I remonstrated with my tutor—I wept abundantly— I hung about my poor dumb friend, and talked to him in the language of affection. Lady Aubrey would take no
[Page 224]
denial—and Mr. Hanbury persuaded me to gratify her wish, in hopes that my compliance might soften her resentment. —I consented—but my sorrow was inordinate — “Ah! my beloved friend, my gentle companion!” exclaimed I, “we must part—perhaps for ever! I preserved thy life—thou wilt not forget me! I am compelled to yield thee up— to consign thee to a new master; to one who was born to tyrannize over me, and to rob me of every thing I value.”
We departed. The summer had declined; and the rich scenery of autumn perpetually met our eyes as we traversed a beautiful and luxurious country. Every day, every moment was devoted to mental improvement; and though my most meritorious propensities had hitherto produced more pain than pleasure, I still resolved to follow the example of my tutor, and to persevere in the path which
[Page 225]
he had trodden, though every step were planted with the thorns of disappointment.
We arrived at Glenowen: my bosom throbbed with something like the interest which the heart feels when we meet a dear and long lost friend. The bare and misty mountains, contrasting the low and fertile valley, seemed like the barren pride of greatness, towering over the cultivated minds of those whom destiny had placed in the calm vale of life. The idea occupied my fancy, till my eyes caught the first glimpse of the manor-house, just visible above the yellow foliage of the declining season. I left you, my native home, thought I, all gay, and fresh, and verdant!—I find you stealing to temporary decay, yet flaunting your withered canopy, as if you lingered till my return. Beloved and solitary home! thou hast still a nook to shelter the unhappy: thy storms, thy dark and cloudy
[Page 226]
skies will not disturb my meditations, or cast a gloom over my expanding reason! For I have felt the misery of contempt, the chilling hour of disappointed hope, even amidst the glow of summer radiance; I have known the human heart to congeal with apathy, while the gaudy exterior basked in the sunbeams of prosperity!
Mrs. Dickens and Mr. Martlet observed our chaise advancing along the park, and met us at the front door with wide-stretched eyes of wonder and curiosity. I leaped from the carriage, and instantly hastened to the saloon in which I had left the portrait of Sir Edward: it had been cleaned, and placed in a more lively part of the room; the windows were open; the warm sun shone upon it; I sancied that the features smiled; and all the unkindness of Mrs. Dickens was from that moment forgiven.
[Page 227]
My next inquiries were after old Match'em: and my grief was excessive when I was informed that, a few days before my return to Glenowen, he had closed his weary life, worn out with labour. A variety of painful sensations rushed into my bosom, till reflection mingled the balm of reason with the sensibilities of pity. “He is gone!” exclaimed I with half-stifled emotion; “but he is at rest!” As the sentence concluded, the tear which regret had awakened, was chased away by the smile of resignation!
[Page 228]
CHAP. XV. As soon as my luggage was conveyed into the hall, and the post-boy discharged, we hastened to the parsonage, where, to our infinite grief—for I had already learnt to participate in the sorrows of a friend—we were informed that the venerable father of Mr. Hanbury had been dead more than a month. It was then my turn to solace the afflicted; I wept abundantly; I gave him tear for tear; and, even by the sympathy of childhood, considerably relieved his sorrow! for my tutor's grief was sincere, but not inordinate; he lamented, but his regret was blended with submission.
The news of Mr. Hanbury's death had been conveyed to Lady Aubrey during our journey from Nice to Glenowen;
[Page 229]
and, by the following post, my tutor received a letter, presenting him the living, with credit on her banker for five hundred pounds to improve and embellish the parsonage. She expressed her regret that Mrs. Blagden's violence of temper had occasioned the separation; and, though she never even mentioned me in her letter, it contained many professions of regard and affection towards Mr. Hanbury. I will not detail my feelings as they rose progressively from my sorrows, but briefly state the events of my life, till I reach that epoch when the tablet begins to assume a more sombre aspect.
Two years after our return to Glenowen, we set out for Bristol, in order to transact some important business relative to the will of the deceased Mr. Hanbury, and to fetch home his daughter, who was placed at a boarding-school in the vicinity of that city, where my tutor
[Page 230]
had many wealthy relations. We were kindly received, and hospitably entertained. We found Miss Hanbury extremely beautiful in person, but her mind was as entirely uncultivated as though she had been the pupil of a Siberian savage—She had not the smallest knowledge of the world or its customs; she had passed the daily routine of boarding-school tuition with a sort of mechanical precision, which neither expands the heart nor enlightens the understanding. She had read authors, whose works she did not comprehend; prattled a foreign jargon, without knowing the meaning of the words she uttered; finished needle-work which in half a century would only adorn the lumber-room of her grand-daughter; and learnt, by ear, a few old lessons on the harpsichord, so little graced by science and so methodically dull, that they would scarcely have served as an opiate to a country
[Page 231]
'squire, after the voluntary toil of a foxchase. For this lingering death of every mental blossom, Isabella's conscientious governess had received a considerable annual sum, which had been paid during five years by Mr. Randolph her mother's brother, a wealthy merchant, who considered his lovely niece as the child of his adoption.
Mr. Hanbury's father, while on his death-bed, had written a letter to Mr. Randolph, thanking him for all his kindness to Isabella, and requesting that he would permit her to finish her education in that retirement which was most congenial to study. He further intreated that the important task of cultivating her mind might be undertaken by her brother, then with me on his journey from the continent. “I wish,” said the dying parent, “that my beloved infant, Isabella, may be instructed, not only in all the finished accomplishments, which are
[Page 232]
deemed indispensable in this age of trifling, but also in the more solid and masculine lessons of improvement, such as form the scholar and dignify the attributes of reason. There can be no rational objection to such a mode of education, as long as woman is gifted with those mental powers which place her on an equality with man. The art of pleasing will be the natural inmate of her bosom; she will, by instinct, cultivate the softer graces; the flattery of our sex, and the vanity of her own, will instruct her to charm by feminine attractions; but let her look beyond the trivial claims of sexual rivalry; let her be taught to feel that she is capable of prouder, nobler acquirements! that she is born with reason, which should break through the trammels of custom, and assert its equal rights with those tyrants who would enervate her mind, and bend her lofty spirit to the yoke of ignorance and
[Page 233]
slavery.” This letter had awakened a considerable degree of regret in Mr. Randolph's bosom; and it was not till two years after Mr. Hanbury's death that the injunction was made known to my tutor, who joyfully undertook the task imposed on him by the last wish of his expiring father.
Isabella was one year younger than myself. I was tall, athletic, and almost as dark as an Egyptian: she was fair, beautiful, and gentle as the first breath of morning! During our residence at Bristol, Mr. Randolph was particularly attentive to me; and frequently, in moments of jocularity, would call me “Isabella's intended husband.” The blush which never failed to suffuse her cheek, seemed to confirm the prediction; and, in proportion as she receded, my young imagination cherished hopes wild and romantic. The husband, the future husband of Isabella! every fibre of my
[Page 234]
heart throbbed at the idea! What undescribable impulse awakened the pleasing agitation, I know not: passion it could not be, at so early an age; were I a predestinarian, I should call it fate. But I am wandering.—
On the day fixed for our departure, Mr. Randolph presented Isabella a purse of gold, and several valuable trinkets, as tokens of his affection. “My dear Walter,” said he, addressing my tutor with a degree of emotion which he could not stifle, “to your love and protection I resign this amiable child, this darling offspring of a departed sister. Her memory will ensure my most zealous services; and her virtues will, I trust, be the pure models for Isabella's study. The graces, which are implanted by the hand of nature, will be called forth by your powers of cultivation. She is fair and rich in mental treasures; but were she less endowed, less beautiful to behold,
[Page 235]
she were still the child of a beloved sister, and as such the inheritor of my affections.”
Every word which Mr. Randolph uttered, penetrated my heart. I could not help drawing many painful comparisons betwixt his conduct and that of Lady Aubrey. She too had an amiable sister; I was the only offspring of that sister; and yet, I was, with all my claims to pity and protection, abandoned, spurned, forgotten! The recollection cast a gloom over my mind, and a tear of regret which accompanied it could not be concealed. Mr. Randolph observed the sudden change in my countenance and manner, while with an encouraging smile he inquired the cause of my emotion. I sighed but could not speak; the full heart beat too highly for the tongue to give its feelings utterance. Mr. Randolph again addressed me: “My noble little friend,” said he, taking my hand
[Page 236]
and shaking it heartily, “this sorrow at departing indicates that you have been satisfied with my attentions. Is it the pain of quitting my family that renders you thus melancholy?” I briefly answered, “No.”
“Are you sorry that Isabella is the companion of your journey?”
“No, no,” replied I, roused from my reverie by the suggestion; “I love Isabella, better, much better than I love myself, and am glad to find that she is happier than I shall ever be.”
Mr. Randolph looked earnestly at me during several minutes. “Continue to love her,” said he smiling; “and endeavour to prove yourself worthy of that return which may, at some future period, be the source of felicity to both.” Then, turning to Mr. Hanbury, he added, “There is something in this boy that pleases me, that tells me he is born to soar above the common track
[Page 237]
of men; labour to expand his mind— and who knows but—”
“I comprehend your meaning,” interrupted my tutor, “and it will be the pride and pleasure of my life to render them worthy of each other.”
Mr. Randolph embraced us alternately, and after presenting me a bank note of twenty pounds, to “buy baubles for my future wife,” with tears in his eyes bade us “farewel, and remember.”
From that moment I became attached to Isabella, as I had been before estranged from Sir Sidney Aubrey; so strong, so powerful are the pernicious effects of early prejudice.
We returned to Glenowen, after six months absence; our affection seemed to augment every moment: Isabella was the companion of my studies, the play-fellow of my hours of recreation: in all my walks, in all my exercises, she was my associate: I loved her with a brother's
[Page 238]
fondness: I felt the irresistible power of female attraction, but I felt it unmixed with the destructive passions. I adored her, purely, tenderly. It was the idolatry of innocence; nothing sexual contaminated my bosom; for the beauty of her person only presented to my mind an epitome of her virtues! Rosanna, my pen trembles as I proceed; but you have commanded, and I will obey your wishes.
CHAP. XVI. The spirit of emulation animated our studies, while the progress which we made was rapid and astonishing. From time to time, Mr. Hanbury rewarded our labours with such little prizes as he deemed sufficient to excite the vanity of
[Page 239]
knowledge, without degrading the mind with the poison of avarice. Several small medals had been contended for, and our triumphs had been nearly alternate. Isabella every day improved in graces, both of mind and person: her form was beautifully proportioned; her countenance expressive and interesting, and her complexion tinted with a transparent glow, which gave it a degree of animation scarcely human.
The words which Mr. Randolph had so emphatically repeated at our parting, perpetually haunted my imagination, attended by a train of chimeras, fatally flattering: “Endeavour to prove yourself worthy of that return which may, at some future period, be the source of felicity to both!” There was something sweetly prophetic in this counsel; my senses eagerly imbibed the soothing mischief; and every hour convinced me, that the proudest bliss my heart could
[Page 240]
ever experience, would be that of deserving Isabella.
Lady Aubrey removed from Nice, and fixed her residence in Switzerland. Time journeyed gaily on till I attained my fourteenth year: during the summer months our studies were pursued in a shady bower at the extremity of the garden; it had been formed and embellished by me; it was the favourite retreat of Isabella. A thick grove sheltered it from the mid-day fun, and the breezes from the mountains passed lightly over it: a thousand simple flowers perfumed the threshold; legions of Nature's choristers, by their “wood notes wild,” broke in upon the solitude, and rendered it a little elyfium! Why does my lacerated bosom bleed afresh, while I describe this scene of past delights? Why does my blood steal coldly through my veins, when I recollect that they are flown for ever?
[Page 241]
At the close of a sultry day, returning from a long walk, as we came within sight of Glenowen, we were surprised by an universal redness which filled the atmosphere over the manor-house; and, on a nearer approach, we discovered, that the north wing of the venerable mansion was on fire. The whole neighbourhood was shortly after alarmed; and the peasantry crowded in columns towards the scene of horror. The conflagration had commenced in Lady Aubrey's apartment; the flames burst through the windows, and menaced the destruction of the whole fabric. Mr. Martlet, with a large body of villagers, was employed in removing the furniture, which was new and splendid. I rushed into the hall, and, amidst clouds of smoke, ascended the stairs of my aunt's dressing-room, the superb hangings of which were just beginning to blaze. After conveying many articles of value
[Page 242]
through the window, by cords which were thrown to me for that purpose, I found the flames press rapidly upon me; and at the same time discovered, that the gallery, which communicated with the centre of the building, had also taken fire. There was no time to hesitate: I rushed forth, amidst the confiagration, and again reached the great hall, unconscious of the burden which pressed heavily on my shoulders. I hastened to a small wood that sheltered the east wing of the house; which, being the farthest distant from the scene of desolation, was chosen as the safest spot on which the effects preserved might be deposited. It was a clear moonlight night, and the scene was awfully impressive. I stood almost petrified with horror; when, by a sudden blaze which issued from the roof, I discovered that the last article which I had brought from Lady Aubrey's dressing-room, was the ivory cabinet
[Page 243]
which contained the fiat of my destiny. I started at the reflection! I shuddered, as I contemplated the object before me! A cold tremour thrilled through my bosom, while I meditated the guilty project of forcing the lock, and exploring its mysterious deposit.
At this momentous crisis Isabella's voice called on me from the entrance of the path; the found alarmed my heart, big with premeditated guilt; I snatched up the precious cabinet, and again hurrying towards the middle of the wood, which was over-run with brambles, hastily concealed it beneath branches which I tore from the surrounding trees; and then, quitting the spot, returned to Isabella.
Her joy was infinite. “Dearest Walsingham! thank Heaven you are safe!” exclaimed the trembling girl, while she eagerly snatched my hand, and kissed it, with the fondness of a sister.
[Page 244]
I shrunk from her caresses—shrunk like a miserable caitiff. “We saw you rushing amidst the flames,” continued Isabella, “and our fears were terrible! My brother is now in search of you; let us fly to relieve his anxiety.” She endeavoured to lead me from the spot, but my feet seemed rooted to the ground, and all the powers of motion in an instant forsook me. “Leave me, Isabella,” said I with a faultering voice, “leave me, I conjure you: the nightair is chilling; the sudden transition from heat to cold will endanger your safety. There is peril—destruction in every blast—begone, I intreat you to begone.”
“Are you not equally liable to its effects?” replied Isabella. “This damp wood is full of mischiefs.” I started. “It is indeed!” said I, shuddering with the consciousness of my situation. “Why this trembling?” continued
[Page 245]
Isabella, still holding my hand, and gently compelling me to retread the narrow path; “the alarm, the horror of the calamity which you have just witnessed, has overpowered your reason: indeed, my dearest Walsingham, you are not like yourself.”
“Can guilt so change us?” cried I, with increased perturbation.
“Guilt!” repeated Isabella; “of what have you been guilty? Can it be a crime to endanger your own life, in the service of another? Lady Aubrey will love you; she will thank you for your exertions;—what you have done this night will—”
“Disgrace me eternally!” exclaimed I, interrupting her. She was more bewildered than ever;—her hand was cold and trembling;—concluding that my senses were disordered, she sunk upon my arm, and burst into an agony of tears. Her sympathetic sorrow awoke
[Page 246]
me to reflection, and, for a moment, I shook off the lethargy that benumbed my faculties. I firmly grasped Isabella's hand, and hurried towards the manor-house, which was still burning with resistless fury. The whole atmosphere was illumined by the glowing pyramid which was formed of the fragments already consumed; and the losty trees of the surrounding woods were tinged with a crimson lustre, awfully contrasting the pale beams of the moon, and rendering the midnight hour sublimely horrible!
At the entrance of the wood we met Mr. Hanbury, who, with excessive joy, embraced us both. “What is to be done?” exclaimed he, “the whole fabric will be reduced to ashes; the central apartments are already on fire; and since your quitting the scene of desolation, no one has ventured among the ruins. Lady Aubrey's dressing-room contained many papers of importance.”
[Page 247]
“Indeed!” said I hastily; “who told you so?”
“Mr. Martlet,” replied my tutor. “He has received several letters from Lady Aubrey, since her residence on the continent, charging him to keep those apartments locked; particularly that which contained the cabinet of ivory.”
My whole frame was convulsed with contending emotions; I had frequently remarked that the dressing-room windows were closed entirely, and that I never could, by any means, obtain a view of its interior.
“Was the cabinet so valuable?” said I, with a voice scarcely articulate.
“So it appears by the solemn injunctions repeated in Lady Aubrey's letters to Mr. Martlet,” replied my tutor. “When you were in the apartment, do you remember having seen it?”
“I do,” answered I, for I had not the meanness to assert a falsehood.
[Page 248]
Mr. Hanbury was preparing another question, which might have put my integrity to the trial, and discovered the secret cause of my perturbation, when the whole roof fell in, with a crash that was terrific. The found smote my bosom with regret unutterable: the asylum of my infancy, the abode of so many past and happy events, so many mournful and heartpiercing reflections, was, in a few short hours, reduced to a mass of ruins, inclosed between blackened walls, and casting an inconceivable melancholy over every surrounding object.
[Page 249]
CHAP. XVII. It was day-break when we returned to the parsonage. Isabella was exhausted by fatigue, terror, and anxiety; and the events of the night past had so strongly exercised my feelings, that on reaching my chamber, and throwing myself on my bed, I sunk into a deep sleep which lasted several hours. As soon as I awoke, I started from my pillow, scarcely satisfied in my own mind whether the confiagration had really taken place, or that a dream had deceived my senses, and presented horrors which in fact had never existed. The melancholy conviction soon met my eyes; for, on approaching the casement of my chamber, the first objects I beheld were the shattered walls of the manor-house, inclosing a furnace still smoking with the remnant
[Page 250]
of its interior adornments. I stood for several minutes contemplating the scene of desolation, which being the first of the kind that I had ever witnessed, excited sensations of the most gloomy and awful description.
The sweet repose which weary nature procured for me, had taken off the lassitude of fatigue, and my renovated senses became more alive to the acute regrets which now assailed them. The costly apartments which Lady Aubrey had embellished; the ancient and lonely chamber where I had slept, when Sir Sidney's birth annihilated all my visionary hopes; the hall where Sir Edward's corpse had rested in state; and the portrait on which I had gazed with such fond distress, when I first quitted Glenowen, were all consumed by the devouring flames, and lost for ever. The memory of these, though trifling objects, led to a train of rumination that seemed endless. I dressed myself,
[Page 251]
and hastily proceeded towards the park, whither Mr. Hanbury had gone some time before me. I panted to unburden my full heart; to exonerate my inquiring mind from that imputation of guilt, which the self-reproving spirit would not suffer to lie dormant. The mysterious language which, in my childhood, I had heard fall from the lips of Lady Aubrey respecting the ivory cabinet, had never been communicated to my tutor; I dreaded the reproaches which would follow a confession, that I had descended to the degrading task of listening with the hope of prying into the secrets of another. Having concealed the event a certain length of time, I then thought it too late to unfold my error; I had not resolution to risk Mr. Hanbury's eternal displeasure, or to stigmatize myself with the meanest and most unpardonable violation of domestic confidence.
[Page 252]
Perplexed, and almost wearied into desperation, I passed the wood where the source of my agonizing conflicts had been deposited the preceding night. I would have given worlds, had worlds been at my disposal, to have boasted that resisting quality, which imposes selfdenial, even where our passions and our interests impel us on to mischief. But I was the pupil of nature: my mind was permitted to form its bent, before I had judgment to discriminate the paths which led to reputation or dishonour. I rushed forward, blind and impetuous: the present impulse guided me; the future pang of compunction was neither feared nor anticipated. I had no prospect of happiness; and a perpetual scene of sorrow disheartened me, till fortitude and hope seemed weary of the contest. When I came near the spot where I had deposited the cabinet, my whole frame shrunk and shivered! to embezzle the property of
[Page 253]
another; to take advantage of a calamitous moment, for the purpose of committing little less than a robbery, filled my mind with horror. I interrogated myself, for what purpose I concealed the cabinet? Can I, like a daftardly villain, a caitiff felon, break open the sacred repository of another's secrets? Impossible! A moment's pause produced a second question. Does self-preservation authorize an outrage to atrocious? The last suggestion staggered me, while my heart throbbed at the peril it presented.
Sometimes I meditated the plan of burying the cabinet, till Lady Aubrey's return to England: at others, I resolved to unsold the whole mystery to Isabella; but the dread of her disapprobation soon overpowered the dawning rectitude, which would in some measure have extenuated my original fault, and put a period to the progress of my criminality. While I was rapt in thought, Mr. Hanbury
[Page 254]
came suddenly in my way, and the moment seemed to present itself for my rescue from infamy. I started; I trembled; I took his arm: my countenance was pale and marked with contending agonies. He conjured me to reveal the cause of my inquietude. I could only articulate, “Thank Heaven! my better genius has prevailed.” We walked hastily, for he permitted my arm to guide him, till we came to the middle of the wood; my tutor's consternation kept him silent; and my respiration was almost suspended, by the important secret I was about to develope.
We approached the spot, where, through the thickly woven branches which I had heaped over the cabinet, a part of the ivory met our view. I stopped abruptly, and grasping his hand, inarticulately exclaimed, “The cabinet is safe. Do you not observe it? There, there it lies. Be secret—be prudent—
[Page 255]
I snatched it from the flames; and, uninterrupted by the busy multitude, hid it beneath the underwood which you see before you.” As I concluded these words, I fell upon my tutor's neck, and buried my distorted features in his bosom.
“Why this emotion?” inquired Mr. Hanbury. “Wherefore does the accomplishment of a generous enterprise afflict and agitate you?”
I conjured him not to question me. “There is more danger in your zeal than kindness in your solicitude,” said I. “Rest satisfied that Lady Aubrey's property is safe,—and that I am honest.”
“Who suspects your integrity?” cried Mr. Hanbury, with some surprise.
“Myself!” answered I, hastily. “I stand accused by that monitor within, which no art can silence, no sophistry delude. I have deceived you; I have
[Page 256]
deceived my own weak mind. I fancied that the revolving wheel of fortune would scatter minute events to the chaos of oblivion. Fool that I was, I thought that conscience could be rendered subservient to self-interest. I did not recollect, that the villain, though master of his own crime, is still the vassal of compunction.”
“Your reasoning is merely hypothetical,” replied Mr. Hanbury; “bring me a case in point, and I will answer you: till then I shall deem your language wild and incoherent.”
“At some future period all shall be explained,” said I; “for the present I must only conjure you to set me beyond the temptation of my own passions. Assist me in conveying the cabinet to some place of safety, and then take charge of it yourself till Lady Aubrey's return to England. This favour you cannot, you will not deny me.”
[Page 257]
“Shall we deliver it to Mr. Martlet?” said my tutor; “he is an old domestic in the family, and much valued for his honesty.”
“Not for worlds,” replied I; “he must not know that the cabinet is preserved.”
“To whom can we so safely confide the property of Lady Aubrey, as to her confidential servant?” continued Mr. Hanbury.
“Keep it yourself,” said I. “If you regard my peace, I charge you to keep it; for on the preservation of that repository depends my happiness or misery for ever!”
My tutor assisted me to list the cabinet, which I had borne alone in the moment of horror, and we conveyed it to the parsonage without interruption; where it was immediately deposited in my tutor's chamber, with his solemn promise, never to urge me farther on
[Page 258]
the subject. I felt my mind somewhat more tranquil, though not less culpable; the faintest ray of sunshine looks brilliant when it succeeds a storm.
A few days after the destruction of the manor-house, I received the intelligence that my father had married a second wife, almost young enough to be his daughter. He had for many months neglected writing to me; and, never having seen him since I first became the protegée of Lady Aubrey, the very cords of nature seemed slackened to inertion. Mr. Hanbury had been to me, since I had learnt to discriminate, more than a parent; I knew no other: my obedience, my gratitude, my affections, were his; for the mere name of relationship cannot influence a reasoning mind, where the duties of life, and the ties of propinquity, are broken and destroyed by neglect and unkindness. We are bound by affection
[Page 259]
to our parents for their care of us in our helpless state, and for the parental feelings which they exemplify during our progress to maturity; but to assert that a child is indebted to its parents for vitality is absurd and erroneous. Indeed when we look round this wide and eventful scene of sorrow and delusion, how few are there who can thank the author of their being; while thousands, and tens of thousands, lament the hour that first opened their eyes to the miseries of existence.—
For what is life?—A summer day
   That dawns bedew'd with icy tears:
Youth glitters like the orient ray,
   'Till busy, toilsome noon appears.
Then, while the stormy passions reign,
   The warm horizon shad'wy grows,
And only gloomy shades remain
   To veil the world at evening's close.
[Page 260]
CHAP. XVIII. At the age of seventeen I was placed in the university of Cambridge, at Mr. Randolph's expence, and with his most earnest injunctions to omit no opportunity of completing my scholastic labours. My mind was naturally studious, and sometimes serious, to a degree that gave me the appearance of a cynic. The retirement, in which I had grown from infancy to manhood, nursed the thoughtful propensities of my nature, and tinctured it with a melancholy, which can never be eradicated.
It was not till I was separated from Isabella that I knew how tenderly I loved her. The playful fondness of childhood had ripened into conviction of her power, and I was now conscious, fatally conscious, that she was the object of my enthusiastic idolatry.
[Page 261]
Previous to my departure from Glenowen, Isabella promised to correspond with me; she did not forseit her word: our letters breathed the purest, tenderest friendship; but nothing more: they were slow and subtle poisons, sweetened by fancy, yet certain to annihilate. I continued to imbibe their influence;—I was my own destroyer.
There years elapsed, and I still remained at the University. Isabella's letters were my solace and my pride; they were written with that noble sincerity, that natural eloquence, which penetrates and refines the heart. She was the counterpart of her brother—generous, candid, and enlightened. I often, in my letters to Mr. Hanbury, expressed a wish to visit Glenowen; but he as repeatedly conjured me to relinquish the idea of quitting college, till I could leave it entirely. His injunctions were not to be violated: I devoted every
[Page 262]
moment to mental labour, looking impatiently for the hour when fate would again bless me with the sight of Isabella. How little do we know the progress of our affections by the morning of love, where all is sunshine, splendour, and animation!
From my infancy it had been my wish to make the army my profession. Reason and reflection pointed it out as the only means of providing for myself honourably: destitute, as I was, of fortune, I knew no other method of acquiring independence; and as a military life dazzles the fancy, while the triumphs of fame deaden the heart against the pleadings of philanthropy, the romantic energy of my mind anticipated the hour when I should lay my laurels at the feet of my supreme idol!—when I should rise by the atchievements of my sword, or fall in the defence of my country. I felt a strong conviction, that nature had
[Page 263]
bestowed no graces, either mental or personal, that could render me worthy of Isabella; and I resolved to seek for those advantages which are not to be found in the dull paths of life—what I wanted in fortune, I hoped to acquire by fame—to live distinguished, or to perish forgotten.
The manor-house had been rebuilt on a more extensive plan, and with great magnificence; the period was fixed for my quitting college; only two months more were to terminate my studies, when I received a letter from Isabella containing the following intelligence—
“Splendid preparations are making at Glenowen for the return of Lady Aubrey and her family: Mrs. Blagden has written a letter to Mr. Martlet, full of panegyric on your cousin, Sir Sidney, whom she describes as the handsomest and most accomplished of mortals!
[Page 264]
It is impossible to express how anxiously I wait for their arrival. Do not be jealous, Walsingham, but I am already half in love with Sir Sidney, though his portrait is coarsely drawn by the hand of a partial delineator.—You must put on your best looks, and call forth your most polished manners, left the rust of a college should form a melancholy contrast to the brilliancy of a foreign education.”
The playful sincerity which marked every line of Isabella's letter, while it evinced the ingenuousness of her heart, filled my bosom with new and agonizing inquietude. I read the lines over and over; all my ancient hatred was revived, and Mrs. Blagden appeared to be my evil genius. I wrote several answers to Isabella's letter, all of which I destroyed as soon as written. I resolved to set out for Glenowen, when pride checked the impulse of affection, and I
[Page 265]
as hastily determined to wait the arrival of Sir Sidney. “Have I preserved his life to embitter every moment of my own?” said I in an agony of rage and irritation. “Shall I see myself again supplanted, and by Sir Sidney Aubrey? No, no: by all that is sacred, I will perish first!” Such were my ravings; such the frenzied determinations of a mind alarmed, wounded, humbled; I was wild and frantic.
The next post brought me farther intelligence from Isabella; I trembled as I received the letter from my servant; I threw it on the table, not having courage to open it while he was present, ashamed of the weakness which I had not resolution to conquer. Oh, Rosanna! these were moments, terrible indeed! I had experienced many sorrows, felt innumerable pangs; but the supreme of misery, the torture which the jealous heart endures, was, till that period of
[Page 266]
my life, unknown to me. I could have annihilated Sir Sidney Aubrey, myself, Isabella! All the potent mischiefs of early prejudice now burst forth in a mighty and ungovernable phalanx; while every gasping wound in my agonized bosom panted for revenge.
I paced to and fro in my study—snatched up the letter—read the superscription, shuddered—cursed my fate, and again threw it on the ground in a paroxysm of despair; till at length, with a sort of desperate resolution, I broke the seal and read as follows—
“Lady Aubrey arrived yesterday; Sir Sidney is an angel! never did nature form so wonderful a creature! How shall I describe him? What pen can do justice to that model which mocks the powers of description? High as expectation had been raised by Mrs. Blagden's letter, the glowing colours of fancy proved too faint for the original
[Page 267]
which they essayed to represent. Figure to yourself a form moulded by the Graces, and fashioned by a studious desire to please; a countenance rather interesting than regular; eyes!—Oh, Walsingham! I will not attempt to delineate them; they would mock the powers of a more experienced artist. Then, his manners are so fascinating, so polished, so animated! He sings divinely, and plays on many instruments with skill the most enchanting! We passed the whole evening in rambling about the woods. He repeated several passages from the Italian poets, and from Ossian; for he has been these last four years under the tuition of one of the most learned and enlightened men in Switzerland. Born to embellish society, Sir Sidney comes among us like a constellation; every scene assumes new powers of attraction; every object looks gay at his return! Hasten to behold
[Page 268]
hold this celestial being, left Nature, thinking him too perfect for this world of sorrow, should remove him to purer, happier regions.”
I read no further. I threw the letter from me, and, in one short moment, I pitied, hated, despised, and doted on Isabella. What slaves do our passions make of us! What an inconsistent being is a lover! What are the vaunted triumphs of education, if our affections can rise in rebellion to overturn the empire of reason?
On the following morning I received a summons from Mr. Hanbury to set out without delay for Glenowen. His letter was likewise filled with encomiums on the accomplished Sir Sidney. This was the confirmation of all I feared, and all I anticipated. I knew that my tutor was superior to prejudice, and that the immutability of truth formed the basis of all his opinions. “He cannot
[Page 269]
be deceived,” said I: “he has no motive for tormenting me. His imagination is tempered by experience, and cannot be cheated through the dazzling medium of partial affections. I will hasten to Glenowen; I will judge for myself: I will examine this phenomenon; I will be convinced.” I quitted college,—and my prediction was verified; —I was convinced.
Sir Sidney Aubrey was exactly the being whom Isabella had described—handsome, polite, accomplished, engaging, and unaffected. He sung, he danced, he played on the mandolin, and spoke the Italian and French languages with the fluency of a native. Yet these were not his only acquirements; he fenced like a professor of the science; painted with the correctness of an artist; was expert at all manly exercises; a delightful poet; and a fascinating companion.
[Page 270]
On my arrival he met me in the park; “My dear Walsingham,” said he, “how long I have wished for this reunion! Though far distant, you have been often present to my thoughts; and never without my heart's bearing testimony of my gratitude and esteem.”
His words distracted me: he flew towards the portico of the manor-house, where Lady Aubrey was sitting.— “Oh, merciful God!” exclaimed I, shuddering, “am I destined to be at enmity with such a mortal?”
Lady Aubrey's pride and arrogance had not been worn away by the passing pinions of time; she received me coldly, and, by a frown of reproof, endeavoured to check the warm and generous zeal which Sir Sidney was emulous of evincing. “Your hospitality overcomes your reason,” said my aunt; “this extravagant vivacity will not do in England.”
[Page 271]
“Then allow me to return to the frozen skirts of Mont-blanc,” replied Sir Sidney. “It will be unnatural to let the heart petrify in this genial and prolific soil; will it not, Miss Hanbury?”
Isabella smiled; I was confused and alarmed: I thought that her countenance was more than usually animated, while her beauty became provokingly dangerous.
“These sallies,” said Lady Aubrey, while every feature settled into a sullen indignation, “these absurd sallies are—”
“The spontaneous effusions of the heart, my dearest mother,” interrupted Sir Sidney. “Miss Hanbury knows that I have been as wild as a mountain kid ever since I returned to Glenowen. She has been the companion of all my rambles; and we mean to explore every path of the woods and vallies to see whether
[Page 272]
Nature is so prudish as to hide her charms for her greatest admirer.”
Isabella's cheek reddened to scarlet; I fixed my eyes on her; she had not resolution to meet their gaze. My cousin proceeded—
“How prettily an English girl blushes!”
“Have you made that observation already?” said I.
“Yes, truly,” answered he with an air of nonchalance that increased my irritation; “for when I saluted Miss Hanbury, her cheek was overspread with a glow that would have excited the envy of a Parisian coquette, newly rouged from her toilette.” My agony was indescribable. “But tell me honestly,” continued Sir Sidney, taking Isabella's hand, and looking earnestly at her, “am I the first happy mortal, whose boldness produced a suffusion which made the very roses faint with jealousy?”
[Page 273]
“I do not comprehend you,” answered Isabella, with a look half reprehensive.
“Come, come, this is affectation,” said my cousin: “consess; has no mortal ever saluted that fair and downy cheek, besides the presuming Sir Sidney?”
“None,” replied Isabella, “except my brother and Walsingham.”
“ Bravissima !” exclaimed my cousin; “fairly owned, by all that's charming. Now I can account for Ainsforth's gloomy appearance. But do not fear me, my good fellow,” continued he, “I never will be your rival.”
“My rival!” repeated I sharply; for he had touched the chord which vibrated through my palpitating heart— “My rival!” the idea was insupportable—Arrogant fool! thought I, dost thou vainly imagine that, after years of fond, of enthusiastic idolatry, the happiness
[Page 274]
or misery of my life depends on thee? Am I at thy mercy? And is the heart of Isabella so easily won, that in a few short hours a stranger should supplant me?
“A truce to the spirit of chivalry,” continued Sir Sidney Aubrey, “for, by the lance of the renowned Sancho, I came not to supplant thee. Sleep in peace, my gallant Walsingham; I will never scatter thorns upon thy pillow.”
“For Heaven's sake drop this idle conversation,” cried Miss Hanbury; “for Mr. Ainsforth seems inclined to render himself perfectly ridiculous.”
There was an air of haughty reprehension, a tone of cold contempt in her words and manner, which I had never, till that moment, witnessed: I was mute with consternation.
“Well,” cried Sir Sidney, “I have often heard that the most simple of God's creatures is a jealous lover; and I
[Page 275]
think the fact now so unquestionable, that I swear, from this hour, never to wear the chains of any mortal woman.”
“You are right, Sir Sidney,” exclaimed I. “The sex is made up of folly and caprice; vanity and the love of power are the predominant passions of the female soul; for these they will sacrifice all the purest affections—all the bonds of friendship and society: give a woman but the laurel of conquest, and she will trample without remorse on all the buds of reason and humanity.”
“Hold! hold!” vociferated Sir Sidney; “woman is a charming creature, provided she has her way; a gentle associate where she has the power to command; a kind friend where there is no prospect of rivalry: and yet there is no living out of their society. Where-ever I go, I make woman my companion; whatever I meditate, I consult a woman: in short, when I abandon the
[Page 276]
sex I must cease to live; for existence will not be worth preserving when woman is forgotten.—What say you, my gallant cousin? am I not right?”
“I was once of your opinion, Sir Sidney,” said I, gravely, at the same time fixing my eyes on Isabella's countenance: “but such is the frailty of human nature—such the undefinable restlessness of our passions, that I am wholly changed—independent of the sex's caprices, free, unshackled as the wind.”
Isabella smiled, but it was the feeble triumph of a moment; a tear, a precious tear, which started from her reproving eye, would, had I been reasonable, have repaid me for all I suffered.
“Thou art wise,” cried Sir Sidney, shaking my hand; “therefore accept the congratulations of a congenial spirit. I too once was constant; I have for many months loved one woman; but I feel
[Page 277]
unconquerable symptoms of a truant disposition, and fear that a new idol will very shortly be triumphant. What would you say to me, if, after beholding all the belles of France, the mountain nymphs of Switzerland, and the love-inspiring dames of luxurious Italy, I should return hither to become the hermit of Glenowen?”
This question, though addressed to me, was accompanied by a glance at Isabella.
“Why the hermit?” inquired Miss Hanbury. “Does the purest passion of the soul deserve to perish beneath the chilling garb of apathy?”
Sir Sidney sighed deeply— “Sweet inquirer!” answered he, “my destiny is sorrow! Therefore Walsingham may be as wretched as he will, he is sure of a companion in affliction.”
We were interrupted by Lady Aubrey, who had been strolling along the park, and the conversation ended.
[Page 278]
CHAP. XIX. Sir Sidney's vivacity pleased, at the same moment that it stung me to the heart. I fancied that he had trifled with my feelings, through a conscious superiority which was the offspring of his mother's overbearing spirit. As soon as dinner was ended, during which Lady Aubrey's chilling austerity kept the circle silent, Sir Sidney proposed a ramble towards the mountains. “Come, the evening breezes are inviting, pretty Isabella,” said he; “we will yet have a race before sun-set: you know that you have promised to accompany me: Walsingham shall stay and make his court to my mother.” In an instant they were out of the room, and I heard them laugh as they crossed the hall: I had not power to reply; Sir Sidney's words, as well as
[Page 279]
his manner, displeased and mortified me. “Make my court” to Lady Aubrey! Heavens! what infamous degradation! Shall I become a cringing fawning sycophant? Is it not sufficiently humiliating, thought I, to relinquish Isabella? Shall I be the slave, as well as the dupe of my own passions? The idea was but little calculated to quell the fever which began to riot in my brain. I was the most unhappy of the human race; the most persecuted of mortals! at least I thought so.
With an aching heart, and an indignant resentment, I watched Isabella and Sir Sidney as they ascended the mountain: I saw them racing, and frolicking, and playing a thousand gambols. Lady Aubrey persevered in a taciturnity which afforded me leisure to be wretched. The objects of my attention reached the summit of the mountain, and, by their descending on the opposite side, I lost
[Page 280]
sight of them entirely. My agitation became insupportable, and, briefly taking leave of my aunt, I returned to the parsonage. Evening closed, and neither Miss Hanbury nor my tutor made their appearance. Twice did I walk to the end of the park, and as often return to my chamber mortified and perplexed. I thought myself the mere make game of a giddy girl, and a vain, exulting libertine. I could not bear the very shadow of oppression; it was at all times agonizing: but oppression from one who had from his infancy been trained to offer insult; tutored to tyrannize; accustomed to consider me as a dependant on his future kindness, and in many instances triumphant over my inclinations, brought with it such horrors, that I shuddered to anticipate the deep shades which were destined to follow them.
While my bosom was endeavouring to subdue its conflicts, Mr. Hanbury entered
[Page 281]
my apartment. “Walsingham,” said he, with a serious and impressive tone, somewhat tinctured with austerity, “there is a circumstance of infinite importance, which calls for your immediate attention. I lament the necessity of this communication, but you must now resign that which you can no longer possess, without, pardon the expression, dishonouring yourself, and stigmatizing my family.”
The cold drops paced down my forehead. Mr. Hanbury paused. “Proceed,” said I saintly, “I am prepared to meet my destiny, even though it should deprive me of all that rendered life desirable.” My quivering lips, which with difficulty articulated these words, my convulsed and agitated frame, alarmed my tutor; and he replied, “You are not prepared, Walsingham; you deceive yourself; collect all your resolution, and we will decide upon this important
[Page 282]
business to-morrow.” As he concluded these words, he quitted the chamber, and left me to ruminate on the purport of his visit.
“Stigmatizing his family!” said I, half frantic at the insult: “would an alliance with Isabella so mark her with disgrace? What am I? Oh, Nature! tell me, where lies the damning quality which renders me unworthy? If in the centre of my breast, I will exterminate its very shadow. Yes, Isabella! I will resign thee! I will for ever obliterate the memory of past hopes; become a sad and wretched exile, from thee, and from the world; and make this heart, this ambitious and foolish heart, do an eternal penance for its folly.”
Midnight advanced, and no Isabella appeared. After many struggles between pride and affection, I again repaired to Lady Aubrey's. How often did I turn back, only to renew my path! On approaching
[Page 283]
the house, I heard music; I entered the hall, where I found a number of the rustic neighbours assembled and dancing; Sir Sidney was the partner of Miss Hanbury. On my appearing in the gay and happy circle, my cousin smiled, and whispered something to Isabella. She looked earnestly at me; my features bore evidence of my distress. The dance only consisted of eight couple, and Sir Sidney proposed making “a merry night of it.” These were his words.
“It is already morning,” said Lady Aubrey peevishly.
“So much the better,” exclaimed my cousin. “The broad sun shall hold a torch to our revelry, and every individual shall partake of it. Mirth is the soul of society; we can but live our day; and if we can make it perpetual spring, why should we ever fancy it December? Pray forgive me, Walsingham,”
[Page 284]
added he, bowing; “but your gloomy countenance suggested the idea.”
“If learning wears so forbidding an aspect,” cried Lady Aubrey, “'tis folly to be wise. A pedant is not fit for any thing in nature.”
“Pardon me, madam,” said I, in a half whisper; “if you apply that name to me, I must deny the charge.”
“What is he good for?” inquired Lady Aubrey.
“To keep a secret,” answered I, sternly; “and to correct unmerited contempt,” added my tutor, who had overheard us. Lady Aubrey was silenced by this rebuke, and the retrospect of her adventure with Lord Linbourne afforded her food for rumination, while it augmented her hatred towards me.
It was in the month of June, and, as the night was sultry, Sir Sidney proposed supping, and renewing the dance after the party had taken refreshment. At
[Page 285]
table he placed himself next to Isabella: he talked to her with easy samiliarity, and at intervals rallied me on my scholastic solemnity. Every tongue was lavish in his praise, and Miss Hanbury's attentions were unremitting. I observed them, and my suspicions were confirmed respecting the subject of her brother's recent communication.
The more I suffered from inquietude, the more Lady Aubrey enjoyed my chagrin, and muttered coarse remarks. I heard distinctly the words “ingratitude,” and “envy;” “needy vagabond,” and “arrogant pedant.” I would have given worlds to have been on the summit of the highest precipice, from whence one step might have hurled my feverish bosom fathoms down the terrible abyss, never to throb again.
The night appeared insupportably tedious: at day-break, Sir Sidney proposed one dance upon the lawn before
[Page 286]
the house. The sun was just beginning to gild the tops of the mountains; the air was temperate; the dew spangled the turf; and the birds began to carol their wild notes from every branch of the surrounding woods. Ah, Rosanna! how like the progress of passion is the summer day. I stole towards the portico; and while Sir Sidney was occupied in arranging the close of the festival, wrote the following
SONNET.
Slow sail the vapours o'er the mountain's crest,
   Unveiling its blue head! The blushing sky
   Flings on the dewy vale its roseate dye,
And morn appears by smiling Nature drest!
Sweet is her breath, and green her ample vest;
   A thousand minstrels round her bosom fly;
   A thousand zephyrs breathe the balmy sigh,
And sprinkle perfumes on her glowing breast.
   So, in the dawn of love, all scenes look gay;
The cheek of her ador'd, out-tints the rose!
   Sweet is her balmy breath, as buds of May,
The pulse beats music, and the bosom glows;
   Our eyes with grateful rapture greet the day,
Nor see the stormy hour, which brings a world of woes.
[Page 287]
I had scarcely finished the last line, when Sir Sidney, whose vivacity was untiring, insisted that all the domestics of Glenowen should join in the dance, and partake of the breakfast. “The lads and lasses shall be forthcoming,” said he, “and therefore the sooner we arouse them, the better. I will awaken the damsels; and if they do not obey the summons, they shall rue their disobedience; for every one that refuses shall—have a kiss from Walsingham.”
Again the butt of ridicule! the fool for idle jests and oblique sarcasms! I began to lose all patience. The whole family was awakened, for the under-servants had been long sleeping; Sir Sidney was master of the ceremonies; refreshments were placed upon the lawn, and the dance recommenced, with increased numbers, and augmented glee. My cousin, with an insulting smile of triumph, again took Isabella's hand, and,
[Page 288]
with provoking malice, begged leave to present me that of Mrs. Blagden. Age had not improved her personal attractions, neither had time diminished my rooted antipathy; yet I knew, that, to discover my humiliation would only be to increase Sir Sidney's merriment. I received my scowling partner, though with an ill grace, and we blundered down the dance together; Mrs. Blagden flouting and flouncing; and I as melancholy as though I had been hastening to execution.
Sir Sidney continued to rally me on my pensive mood by a quotation from Milton, “A beardless cynic is the shame of Nature!” I made no reply. “Live and laugh, my man of learning,” continued he, “for be assured, that pedantry is as unbecoming to youth, as a rose-wreath to the rigid features of antiquated virginity. Travel, Walsingham, travel, visit the rich glow of a
[Page 289]
southern hemisphere, or you will freeze into a statue, fit for nothing but to adorn your grandmother's monument.”
The clamorous laugh which echoed round at the conclusion of this sprightly admonition, was scarcely supportable, when Mr. Hanbury relieved my distress, by proposing that we should return to the parsonage. I did not resent Sir Sidney's ill-timed pleasantry, for I have ever shunned the querulous, vindictive spirit, which only mingles with society to watch the moment of dissension, and to poison the delicious intercourse of friendship. Had not Isabella been the object of my solicitude, Sir Sidney's vivacity would have entertained me: but the proud mind shrinks from the slightest touch of persecution; and the sensitive plant is not more feeble, more undefinably susceptible, than is the throbbing bosom of a jealous lover.
[Page 290]
A thousand torments wait on love;
   The sigh, the tear, the anguish'd groan!
But he, who never learnt to prove
   A jealous pang,—has nothing known!
For jealousy,—supreme of woe!
   Nurs'd by distorted fancy's pow'r,
Can round the heart bid mis'ry grow,
   Which darkens, with the ling'ring hour.
While shadows, blanks to reason's orb,
   In dread succession haunt the brain!
And pangs,—that ev'ry pang absorb,—
   In wild, convulsive tumults reign.
At morn, at eve, the fever burns,
   While phantoms tear the aching breast;
Day brings no calm, and night returns
   To mark no foothing hour of rest.
Nor, when the bosom's wasted fires
   Are all extinct, is anguish o'er;
For jealousy , that ne'er expires,
   Still wounds, when passion lives no more.
[Page 291]
CHAP. XX. On the following morning Mr. Hanbury came early into my apartment; and, by his countenance, I was told the meaning of his visit. Unable to bear the trial that awaited me, and urged by the impatience of despair, I opened the conversation abruptly; I told him, that I had made up my mind to obey his wishes, and conjured him to act as he thought proper, without consulting me further on the subject.
“Are you sure that you will not repent hereafter?” said Mr. Hanbury.
“I cannot repent of that which you deem necessary,” answered I, walking hastily about my chamber, and perplexed, almost to madness.
“Let me conjure you to remember, that my honour, and perhaps your future
[Page 292]
peace of mind, depend on the decision,” continued my tutor; “yet, believe me, Walsingham, if you lament the sacrifice, I shall never cease to regret its propriety.”
“Oh! do not add the misery of humiliation to the torture of necessity,” said I with increased inquietude; “leave me, my friend, my more than father;—leave me to struggle against my adverse fortune; but I conjure you not to pity me. I stand self-convicted; I look back with horror on my own infirmity. Heaven can bear witness, how fatally I was deceived; my senses are awakened; I confess the propriety of your opinions, and am ready to adopt them. But mark me; the subject of this painful interview must, from this moment of humiliating acquiescence, never be renewed: the memory of my past folly must be buried, as shortly my miseries will be, in eternal oblivion; for, dearly as I estimate your
[Page 293]
friendship; strongly as I am bound to you by all the bonds of gratitude and affection, I swear most solemnly never to bear reproach. Take back the precious treasure, and leave me in silence to deplore that I have lost it.”
“Is the sacrifice of such importance?” said Mr. Hanbury.
“God! what a question!” exclaimed I, turning suddenly towards him. “Is honour dear to man? Is the vital air we breathe a part of our existence? Does the sun nourish the embryo blossoms into life? What a question! But you trifle with my feelings, Mr. Hanbury. Do not tempt me to forget the friendship which I owe you; do not teach me to curse the hour which first gave me to your protection; do not suffer me to disgrace my name with the baseness of ingratitude.”
“If it were possible to suggest any idea that might reconcile my mind—” cried my tutor.
[Page 294]
“Hold!” interrupted I, grasping his arm, and looking sternly at him; “I will hear no more. If this distracting subject be again renewed, we part for ever. I charge you to fulfil your wishes;—to gratify the heart of a designing woman;—and to leave me to the fate which seems inevitable.” At the conclusion of these words, I rushed from his presence, and, with a fresh load of anguish on my mind, hastened to Glenowen.
On entering the manor-house I found a new visitor; Colonel Aubrey, the uncle of Sir Sidney, the long-neglected brother of the deceased Sir Edward. Isabella, Mr. Hanbury, and myself, were invited to dine with him; and, though I was not eager to renew the humiliations of the preceding evening, I could not with propriety decline the invitation. All the pride of my heart was called into action for this trial of its fortitude; doomed to behold the object of my affections,
[Page 295]
for the first time since she had consigned me to complete despair; destined to meet a rival, whom from my infancy I had been taught to hate; subjected to the insolence and scorn of an inexorable relation; my perplexities were infinite: but the haughty spirit of my soul sustained me under the accumulated pressure of vexations; and, at the appointed hours, I repaired to dinner.
My aunt had never been a favourite of Colonel Aubrey's; and since the birth of Sir Sidney, all intercourse between them had wholly subsided. She had uniformly endeavoured to estrange them from each other, by representing the early life of her neglected kinsman, as stigmatized with profligacy and blackened by ingratitude towards the deceased Sir Edward. Colonel Aubrey had served with distinguished reputation, but his fortune was unequal to his necessities, and his generosity had long set
[Page 296]
economy at defiance. He was between thirty and forty years of age, well-looking, frank, liberal, and unaffected. He had passed his life in a camp, and was still unmarried.
At the siege of Gibraltar in the year 1781, Colonel Aubrey had been severely wounded. His health was also impaired by long service; and, his regiment being still in that fortress, he had obtained leave of absence, in hopes that change of climate might in time restore him. He had passed six months in London, where the best medical aid, united with his own urbanity of temper, had so far completed his cure, that one month at Bath was deemed sufficient for his perfect recovery.
From the courteous and over-acted attentions of Lady Aubrey, during dinner, it was evident that she was a stranger to the worldly situation of her guest. As soon as the dessert was placed upon
[Page 297]
the table, she began to expatiate on the great wealth of her son, and its vast accumulation during his minority. “For his sake,” said she, “I have consented to bury myself in Switzerland, and to live upon my jointure. He will be the richest of the family that ever bore the name.”
“As I am the poorest!” interrupted Colonel Aubrey.
“You have fame, to compensate for the want of fortune and a title,” said my aunt, with a sarcastic smile appropriate to the observation.
“Then he has that, which is more enviable than either!” cried Sir Sidney, shanking his uncle's hand with the most amiable cordiality.
“Pshaw!” exclaimed Lady Aubrey, “you talk like a child; fame is no bad recommendation for a soldier, but I believe you would hardly be such an embecile
[Page 298]
as to exchange your solid estate for his airy reputation.”
“Indeed, madam,” replied Colonel Aubrey, “there is too much truth in your assertion! All my possessions are merely air, and I am the camelion destined to live on it, unless my nephew has a little more generosity than your ladyship; for, to tell you the plain truth, I came hither to borrow money.”
Lady Aubrey's face suddenly changed colour, while her eyes assumed a broader circle, and her whole frame stiffened with astonishment. A nod of encouragement from Sir Sidney inspired his uncle with new resolution, and he continued:—
“I am a poor soldier, my nephew is a wealthy heir: I have a narrow income; he has a capacious heart! He may live to enjoy the substantial pleasures of the world, while I am fighting for “the bubble reputation;” therefore,
[Page 299]
as it is the first time I ever condescended to borrow, and, probably, the last that your ladyship will be induced to lend, you may as well conclude the business without wounding my pride, or distressing the humanity of Sir Sidney.”
“And pray, Sir,” cried Lady Aubrey, “where are my feelings, that they are not to be consulted?”
“Bring them into court, for they appear to be aliens,” cried Sir Sidney, “and we will examine them. If they can produce evidence that will acquit your heart, mother, I will adore them as the very essence of philanthropy.”
“You are hasty in your decisions,” cried my aunt, fidgeting on her chair, and growing crimson with ill-humour.
Colonel Aubrey renewed his petition. “Time is on the wing,” said he, “and I must join the regiment; Heaven knows when we shall unite again. A
[Page 300]
Spanish fix-pounder would settle all my debts of honour; but that I cannot stoop to accept such a favour from an enemy.” —Sir Sidney's countenance was agitated in the extreme.
“A very modest request,” replied Lady Aubrey. “I believe you are the first man that ever had the effrontery to borrow money at the moment when he was going to lise his life.”
“Heaven forbid!” exclaimed Sir Sidney, rising from table to conceal his emotion.
“And pray, Colonel Aubrey, what recompence is my son to expect for his generosity?” inquired my aunt, gravely.
“The recollection that I did my duty,” replied Sir Sidney, “that I had the supreme felicity of serving a gallant fellow, whose name will be revered when mine is forgotten.”
[Page 301]
“Bravo!” exclaimed I, involuntarily, while my heart, forgetful of its own sorrows, glowed with admiration.
“See, mother,” cried Sir Sidney, “we can thaw even the icy bosom of the philosophic Walsingham.”
“And, pray, who required his comment?” said Lady Aubrey, happy in having an opportunity to unburthen the rage that swelled within her bosom. “When dependants presume to dictate, superiority of condition becomes indeed a shadow. But let me ask you, Colonel, since the matter has gone so far, what may be the sum which you wish to borrow?”
“Three thousand pounds.”
“A mere bagatelle!” exclaimed Sir Sidney; “you shall have it.”
“By what right?” vociferated Lady Aubrey.
“The right, by which virtue claims the participation of Fortune's favours,” answered my cousin.
[Page 302]
I rose abruptly from table; admiration of his conduct struck with electric force to the centre of my heart. I put forth my hand, to meet his; when Miss Hanbury exclaimed, “Angelic being!” Her words arrested my arm, and chilled the glowing impulse which Sir Sidney's generosity had awakened; I could have idolized the mind, which, spurning the base trammels of self-interest, dared act so nobly! But I could not bear to hear such an eulogium from the mouth of Ifabella.
As the evening sky began to redden, we repaired to the park, the closing hour being serene, and the breezes having cooled the atmosphere. Colonel Aubrey walked with Mr. Hanbury, his sister, and myself while Sir Sidney loitered behind in serious conversation with his mother, and by the tones of his voice evidently expostulating with her on the
[Page 303]
subject of his uncle's vist. She seemed inexorable. We rambled about till twilight: Sir Sidney was unremitting in his attentions to his gallant relation. As the western glow began to shut in, and we were descending the path from the summit of a mountain, Colonel Aubrey stopped abrupty: “I once thought this a beautiful prospect!” said he, sighing as he contemplated the rich domains of Glenowen.
“And I lament that you should have cause to contemplate it with a sigh,” interrupted Sir Sidney. “But Fortune is an envious jade, and eternally at war with justice!”
His countenance, as he uttered these words, assumed a degree of expression which I had never before witnessed: a tear started from his eye; and his features became more touching than vivacity ever could have made them. We returned to supper; my cousin
[Page 304]
was pensive and melancholy during the remainder of the evening: he availed himself of every opportunity to converse with his uncle: his voice was low, but his manner was energetic: Lady Aubrey was restless and impatient, till the hour arrived when the party separated.
CHAP. XXI. I returned to the parsonage absorbed in meditation. Sir Sidney's conduct only served to render the pangs of jealousy more acute than ever. She cannot do otherwise than love him! thought I. He is too generous, too exquisitely worthy, not to impress the female heart with admiration bordering on idolatry! Fully convinced of this opinion, during the whole of the following morning. I
[Page 305]
shunned Isabella; for I dreaded to hear her utter those sentiments with which the liberal Sir Sidney inspired every bosom.
There was a frankness about Colonel Aubrey, which seemed the prominent feature of his mind. The jocose, yet feeling manner in which he unfolded his necessities, displayed an ingenuousness of character, which convinced me, more than ever, that truth, in all the varying paths of life, is beautiful and fascinating. I would have made a pilgrimage to the farthest part of the creation, could my journey have rendered the most trifling benefit to such a man. The contrast he presented when compared with Lady Aubrey, spread such deformity over all her mental features, that the contemplative eye turned from them with abhorrence. To become the idolator of virtue, let the pupil of nature explore the labyrinths of vice. They need
[Page 306]
only be known, to be shunned and detested.
My cousin invited the same party to dinner on the following day. Lady Aubrey had pleaded indisposition the whole morning, as the cause of remaining in her chamber; though her motives originated in her determination to avoid Colonel Aubrey. Sir Sidney received us before dinner, and I still remarked that cast of thought, which had so suddenly checked his vivacity on the preceding evening. The contrast which his pensive manner presented in comparison with his former flow of animation, was too striking to pass unobserved, even by an indifferent eye; but to mine that looked towards my cousin's conduct, as the talisman which influenced all its prospects —which bade it see the dawn of returning hope, or pour the starting tear at the anticipation of despair, the smallest change was of infinite importance.
[Page 307]
At table, Lady Aubrey was more than usually haughty and reserved, as if to check the importunities which she expected on the former subject. A cold and general salutation when she entered the dining-room, indicated that frozen avarice which placed a shield before her heart to repel the gentle touches of pity and benevolence. Living only for herself, she knew no throb of sympathy for those who, with more virtue, were less happy; while under the plausible pretext of enriching one darling object, she denied the commiserating sigh to all the rest of the creation.
At dinner Lady Aubrey renewed the subject of the former debate, but in language so chilling, that every hearer anticipated her decision. After placing herself in an attitude of ceremonious rigidity, and settling every feature by the rules of repulsive form, she opened the important business.
[Page 308]
“I have been thinking,” cried Lady Aubrey, addressing herself to the brave petitioner,“of your very ridiculous request; and really, upon mature consideration, wholly divested of prejudice, I do not feel justified in robbing Sir Sidney, to feed your inordinate extravagance.”
“Suppose my nephew consents to the sacrifice,” said Colonel Aubrey, with a mixture of diffidence and chagrin, which was felt by every one present.
“Your nephew, Sir,” continued my aunt, “is not capable of judging in a matter of such infinite importance; indeed, if he had the experience of age, I have made an oath, which no earthly power shall ever induce me to violate, never while I live, to do what is absurdly called a good natured action.”
“Horrible, self-interested woman!” cried Mr. Hanbury, who sat next to me at the lower end of the table.
[Page 309]
Lady Aubrey proceeded— “Three thousand pounds, give me leave to tell you, Colonel, is a sum of great magnitude: Sir Sidney has had to rebuild the manor-house, and my losses, when the old mansion was consumed, were very considerable. We have likewise to provide for Walsingham, who must some way or other be set forward in the world, for he cannot starve; and you have perhaps heard that he has no means of subsistence.”
“Never till this moment,” replied Colonel Aubrey; “but I believe that your ladyship is mistaken in the estimate of Mr. Ainsforth's fortune; he has prospects which place him far above want, and the means to live, beyond the reach of ostentation.”
Lady Aubrey smiled; it was the smile of scepticism; Sir Sidney's agitation was visible.
“I shall be glad to hear Mr. Ainsforth relinquish his expectations from me,”
[Page 310]
said my aunt; “for Heaven knows, I have uses enough for my money, besides bestowing it on poor relations,”
“Then your wishes shall be gratified, madam,” said I, somewhat impatiently; “for, from this hour, I relinquish my claim in favour of one who is more entitled to your friendship.”
“Your claim!” cried Lady Aubrey trembling with rage and indignation;
“I believe, Sir, you will find some difficulty in relinquishing that which you never possessed. Had you ever any reason to hope for a provision from me?”
“Never!” answered I, with a sigh which I could not suppress: “and yet, had your heart been gifted with the throb of human feeling—had you been more like my angelic mother, and less estranged from every characteristic of your respected father—I should have owned my claims, and had them readily acknowledged; but my pride will never yield to assert that propinquity
[Page 311]
which would only serve to stigmatize my nature.”
“One would think,” cried Lady Aubrey, “that you had been taught humility by living so long on the bounty of Mr. Hanbury, who, I am sorry to perceive, has only poisoned your mind, by raising your expectations above your fortune.”
“My fortune will always be equal to my expectations, madam,” said I, rising from table and advancing toward the door; “for I was taught to feel long since how far I might depend upon your kindness. Time has neither exhilarated my hopes nor augmented my vanity: I know that I must exercise my faculties; for I never will debase my feelings by flattering the unworthy.”
“Insolent beggar!” exclaimed my aunt.
“Ungenerous woman!” interrupted Colonel Aubrey; “he shall not want your friendship; I will adopt him; he shall
[Page 312]
have a soldier's fortune; I will give him a commission in my regiment, and we will henceforth seek death or prosperity together: for may I be disgraced, if ever I withdraw my protection on this side the grave.”
“And I will be your companion,” added Sir Sidney, rising abruptly from table.
“ You enter the army!” cried Lady Aubrey.
“Why not, madam?” replied my cousin; “is it not better to perish than to live the slave of avarice? My heart is bursting with compunction; I feel that I am infamous! Colonel Aubrey,” continued Sir Sidney, “I must speak with you in private.”
They rose to quit the room, and Lady Aubrey fainted.
Isabella flew towards the door, and snatching Sir Sidney's hand, conjured him to return. He suffered himself to
[Page 313]
be led back to his mother's chair, scarcely knowing by whom he was conducted. He was convulsed with agitation; he trembled, grew pale, and, in the anguish of his heart, cursed his untoward fortune which destined him to be the victim of a sordid parent. Lady Aubrey in a few minutes began to revive; her countenance was eagerly inquisitive; she looked earnestly round, but her meaning was a mystery. “Sidney,” said she, with a tremulous and agitated voice, “command your fortune, obey the dictates of your heart; but recall your rash and unfeeling menace.”
“Madam, I crave your pardon,” replied Sir Sidney, “but you who taught me to be unfeeling must not reproach me. Both Heaven and yourself can witness that I am not rash: I have been patient, even to my own dishonour.— You are my mother, and as such I am willing to respect you; but nature will
[Page 314]
revolt, when persecution wrings the heart; and even a parent's rights lose their instinctive powers, when tyranny takes place of reason and affection.”
Lady Aubrey's agitation increased with every word Sir Sidney uttered, till she rose and retired to her chamber.
In half an hour Mrs. Blagden delivered a letter to Colonel Aubrey, containing a draft for the sum he requested, and an apology for not appearing, on account of indisposition. In the course of the day I made a serious proposal to accompany Colonel Aubrey on his return to Gibraltar; Sir Sidney implored me to relinquish the idea; repeated the warmest professions of friendship, and assured me that if I would remain at Glenowen, I should share his fortune: I thanked him, but declined the offer. A fortnight passed, and nothing material happened.
[Page 315]
Colonel Aubrey, notwithstanding my readiness to accede to his proposal, would not suffer me to decide rashly on an event which might form the main spring of every future action. He was sensible that my expectations were few, and my prospects clouded; he knew that all my hopes depended on the caprice of a proud, vindictive woman, whose mind was contaminated by avarice, and at the same time devoted to ostentation. He considered my ardent desire to enter a profession which is always dazzling to a young mind, as the offspring of pique rather than the result of dispassionate reflection. Mr. Hanbury united in dissuading me from my purpose: he had ever wished me to study divinity; he felt a philanthropic repugnance to the pursuit of sanguinary warfare, and never heard the exultations of a victory, without heaving a sigh for the miseries of the vanquished. I had for several days
[Page 316]
absented myself from the manor-house, when I again urged him to sanction Colonel Aubrey's proposal; he shuddered— while I pleaded the ambition of a warm and youthful bosom, where every vein panted for independence. Isabella was present during our conversation; she seemed tenderly interested in my fate, and eagerly expressed her hopes that I would relinquish my project. “Consider, Walsingham,” said she, with a tone at once earnest and impressive, “your charming cousin has offered you a home, a sweet asylum, here at Glenowen. —You were once fond of this mountain solitude; the deepest shade, the most barren precipice, had charms for your contemplative imagination: why are you changed? In what respect have they lost their wonted attractions!”
“Isabella, is it you who ask this barbarous question?” said I, while the beating of my heart scarcely allowed my
[Page 317]
tongue the power of utterance. “Can I ever be the associate, the friend of Sir Sidney Aubrey?”
“What should prevent you?” cried Isabella smiling; “with such a companion you cannot fail to be happy; for wherever he goes, felicity must follow.”
“Are these your sentiments, Isabella?” said I, with emotion which I could no longer stifle: “is it the wretched, the distracted Walsingham whom you would humble by making him dependent on the object of your affections? Spare me, I conjure you, spare me the pang of conscious degradation; let not the pupil of your brother stoop to the baseness of dishonour.”
“Compose your mind, my dear Walsingham,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury, “and divest it of that sombre prejudice which early events have but too deeply rooted; Sir Sidney Aubrey deserves that you should think kindly of
[Page 318]
him: his virtues, the generosity of his nature, should interest you by congeniality, and place you beyond the reach of obligation you must remain with us; you must be the friend, the associate of this noble, this accomplished kinsman.”
“Perish the thought!” exclaimed I. “Under all the horrors of approaching events, this spot would be a scene of torture, which my fortitude would shrink at.”
“Every spot which Sir Sidney inhabits must be a terrestrial paradise!” cried Isabella.
I was almost frantic—I could but faintly articulate “I will depart.”
I passed the remainder of the evening in strolling about the skirts of the mountains with my tutor. We conversed incessantly on the inhumanity of Lady Aubrey, and Mr. Hanbury's praises of Sir Sidney were unbounded: “He is a great favourite of Isabella's,”
[Page 319]
said he, “and I fear that she is more attached to him already than is consistent with the safety of her repose.” —My breath was almost lost as he uttered these words; I had not power to make the slightest comment; he continued.—- “Though Sir Sidney is, in every respect, amiable, I cannot help trembling, as I anticipate the perils which seem in store for Isabella. Yet, I dare not caution her upon the subject; such a proceeding would bespeak an unworthy suspicion of his honour, and awaken that pride in her bosom, which would wholly deprive me of its confidence.”
“Perhaps you are mistaken,” said I faintly.
“Walsingham,” replied Mr. Hanbury, “I am the student of nature; I have long read the book of human life, traced its dark and intricate pages, explored the characters it delineates, and
[Page 320]
cannot be deceived by so young a novice. But even supposing. I were less sharp-sighted, I have proofs, incontestible proofs, that Sir Sidney is a lover.”
“I trust not Isabella's!” cried I eagerly.
“I have reason to believe that she is the object of his affection,” said Mr. Hanbury.
“He is too gay, too volatile, to cherish a serious passion,” cried I hastily, dreading to hear the fiat of my destiny, and expecting to be convinced of what I feared to know— “He cannot, he does not love.”
“He has learnt at least how to paint a lover's sorrows,” replied my tutor, at the same time taking a folded paper from his pocket. I trembled—a cold and numbing horror seemed to freeze my heart— “If Sir Sidney loves Isabella—” said I.
[Page 321]
“Hear what he writes,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury, opening the paper, and reading the contents.
O! many are the pangs and keen the woes
   Which lovers' tender hearts are doom'd to feel,
   When sighs, half check'd, the timid griefs reveal,
Seeking, in vain, to paint what passion knows!
When pulses throb with agonizing throes,
   Which tears, unbidden tears, essay to heal,
   Falling, like midnight dews, unseen, that steal
To gem with icy drops the dying rose.
   The rose shall live, when o'er the eastern steep
Returning morn her yellow veil shall spread;
   But when shall blighted passion cease to weep?
On aching hearts what beam shall rapture shed?
   When shall the lover's eye-lids close in sleep,
Save in the long, last slumber of the dead!
I was mute with astonishment; Mr. Hanbury smiled: “This is Sir Sidney's hand-writing,” said he; and I think the subject at least evinces that your young and volatile cousin can feel what he describes.”
“Give me the lines,” said I, “and leave me to discover whether or not
[Page 322]
they are Sir Sidney's. Where did you find them?”
“I had them from Isabella,” replied Mr. Hanbury; “she found them between the leaves of a book which she borrowed from Lady Aubrey's library.” My breast was considerably relieved; I breathed more freely, and endeavoured to treat the matter with indifference. “They are merely a translation; they are not my cousin's composition,” said I; “they bear evident traits of that romantic tenderness which distinguished the Italian poets; the offspring of these cold and petrifying regions knows not how to feel, or to describe the genuine effusions of a lover's mind.” Alas, Rosanna! how plainly did my palpitating bosom contradict the assertion!
“How will you convince yourself?” said Mr. Hanbury.
“I will question Sir Sidney,” answered I, “but with such cautious delicacy,
[Page 323]
as shall neither offend, nor excite suspicion. The repose and honour of your sister demand a speedy explanation; if Sir Sidney's motives are those of honourable love, there can be no impediment to his avowal, and Isabella's felicity.” Mr. Hanbury, after some moments of hesitation, consented to relinquish the paper; and I panted eagerly for an opportunity which was to decide the important question.
[Page 324]
CHAP. XXII. During the remainder of the evening I studiously avoided meeting Isabella. She did not return from Lady Aubrey's till the close of twilight, and as soon as I heard her approaching the parsonage, I hastened to my chamber. Sir Sidney had accompanied her along the park; at the end of the garden I heard him with her “a pleasant evening with the amiable Walsingham.” My blood foamed in every vein: his ironical expression appeared little less than a new insult: she thanked him; I heard them whisper, and I beheld her, by the light of the moon, tripping, with more than usual gaiety, along the garden. She sung an air which Sir Sidney had taught her the preceding evening; every note penetrated
[Page 325]
my heart, and the hours, till day-break, were passed in agony.
Early in the morning I rose from my pillow, weary with the mental conflicts of the night; and hastened to the manor-house: the first person I met in the park was Sir Sidney Aubrey: I watched his countenance, and thought it was agitated by the consciousness of duplicity: I could scarcely suppress my rage; my limbs shook with convulsive torture; my heart throbbed with indignation: he was confused; his voice faultered, as he addressed me; we turned back, and proceeded together towards the house. Not a syllable passed on either side till we came to the library door, which opened on the park; I darted forward; Sir Sidney stopped abruptly on the threshold; I observed his cheek turn pale, and involuntarily muttered, “Dastardly hypocrite!” He rushed by me into the room, and throwing
[Page 326]
himself on a sofa, exclaimed, “It shall terminate, by Heavens! it shall terminate. The fatal secret shall be unfolded, and I will dissemble no longer.” He rose hastily; he rung the bell; a servant entered; Sir Sidney demanded,
“Where is Lady Aubrey?”
“In her chamber, not yet dressed,” was the answer.
“Send Blagden to inform her,” continued my cousin, with a voice low and inarticulate, “that she shall see me in a few minutes.”
He was quitting the library, when I caught his arm and detained him: “Sir Sidney, I request you to stay a moment; I have something which I think belongs to you,” and I sternly; “are you conscious of having lost any thing? Recollect,---be brief,—be candid.”
“Alas too conscious am I, Walsingham, that I have lost a treasure
[Page 327]
which wealth cannot recover: I have lost my tranquillity of mind!” replied Sir Sidney.
“I have a paper which I believe is yours,” said I, at the same time unfolding the sonnet.
“Keep it,” replied Sir Sidney, reddening to scarlet, and attempting to escape. I still grasped his arm. “Walsingham,” continued he, “let go your hold; you know not what you do; this conduct may prove fatal.”
“I defy my fate, Sir Sidney; you have destroyed my every hope of happiness,” answered I with a tremulous tone which betrayed the poignancy of my feelings. Still he struggled to break from me, and still I held his arm. “I wish to talk with you on business of importance: I have much to say, and to explain,” continued I, “respecting Isabella.” He started—the colour forsook
[Page 328]
his cheek, and the flush of confusion was succeeded by the paleness of despair.
“Of Isabella! Do you wish to speak of Isabella? Oh, Walsingham! have a care,” said he; “this is a momentous crisis! you are not conscious to what peril you expose me; you know not how sensibly alive this heart is, which you seek to torture; but if you will be heard, I conjure you to be brief. The miseries of life may terminate, before the triumph of guilt is yet completed. Do you love Isabella?”
“Better than life,” answered I.
“Then I am wretched,” replied Sir Sidney.
“Did you write these lines?” said I, shewing him the verses which I had received from Mr. Hanbury.
“I did—I cannot deny them—they are mine—the effusions of my heart,” answered my cousin, with a voice scarcely
[Page 329]
audible. “Oh, Walsingham! if you knew the fatal secret that wrings my bosom, you would not condemn, but pity me.”
“I know, too well I know the secret which you cannot veil, by art, or by dissimulation,” said I, quitting my hold, and walking hastily about the library.
“How am I to comprehend your words?” cried Sir Sidney; “have you discovered that,—that,—”
“That you love,” said I.
“Whom?” cried my cousin, interrupting me.
“Isabella.”
Sir Sidney smiled convulsively; he endeavoured to speak, but could not; he grasped my hand; every feature displayed unutterable agitation. At this moment Colonel Aubrey entered the room; Sir Sidney darted by him, and I stood like a statue, petrified by consternation.
[Page 330]
“Which way does the battle turn now?” exclaimed Colonel Aubrey: “this is a new and strange kind of warfare; the victor flies, and the vanquished remains master of the field! Sir Sidney whizzed by me like a cannon-ball, and you look as heart-sick and ghastly, as though you were mortally wounded!”
“I am indeed!” answered I; “wounded to my heart's innermost recesses. Sir Sidney has added a link to the chain of my misfortunes, which weighs me down and overwhelms my senses. Yet I must bear it. Perdition! why must I bear it? Sir Sidney is but a mortal; I am a man; what are his claims to Isabella? Fortune! And is the idol of my affections a miserable venal wretch, whose charms are to be bartered at the altar of avarice? Will the adventitious gifts of chance preponderate in the scale, against the superior rights of truth, and long-proved attachment? Oh God! can Isabella
[Page 331]
so far forget her own perfections, as to bestow the treasures of her mind upon a stranger? a gay, capricious, trifling libertine! Impossible! She never shall be his; he shall die, before I will patiently relinquish the only hope, the only treasure that sweetens life.”
“This is madness!” exclaimed Colonel Aubrey; “nothing less than the most unnatural frenzy! If Miss Hanbury loves Sir Sidney Aubrey, and is beloved by him, you cannot violate the laws of reason, by an act of desperation so unjustifiable. You say that Isabella is dear to you, and yet for the gratification of a selfish passion you would destroy her happiness eternally.”
His words awoke reflections, till then subdued by the conflicts of my mind. Destroy the happiness of Isabella! The idea electrified my heart. I quitted the library, and walked hastily on the lawn
[Page 332]
which led to the park. I was agonized and distracted. Colonel Aubrey followed me. The big drops paced down my forehead, when Isabella came forth from the wood, and flew towards us. Never did she appear half so lovely! The wind had dishevelled her beautiful hair; exercise had deepened the soft tints of her complexion, and her eyes sparkled with liquid lustre! Her first inquiries were after Sir Sidney. My misery was undescribable.
“Walsingham,” said the, “you seem unwell; has any thing distressed you? Have you seen your cousin?”
Colonel Aubrey glanced significantly towards me; his looks augmented my humiliation. Isabella proceeded towards the library, and we followed.
There was an inquietude about Miss Hanbury, that confirmed my suspicions more strongly than ever. How easy is
[Page 333]
it, at the same moment, to love, to hate, to pity, and to despise! What shadows do we conjure up to fright our reason from the transient gleam of happiness, which is so scantily allowed us!—While I was eagerly occupied in watching Isabella's looks and actions, Sir Sidney returned. She instantly transferred all her attentions, and addressed to him a thousand trifling questions, which he answered so incoherently, that she, at length, remarked it, and rallied him on his melancholy humour. His whole soul seemed absorbed in gloomy meditation; his eyes were alternately directed towards Miss Hanbury and myself. My situation was perplexing in the extreme: I had not resolution to quit the library; and every moment augmented my dilemma, while I remained a silent spectator of Sir Sidney's agony and Isabella's attentions.
[Page 334]
This distressing embarrassment to all parties was interrupted by Colonel Aubrey, who requested that I would walk with him towards the mountain— “And I will accompany you,” said Miss Hanbury; “for as Sir Sidney seems inclined to meditation, I shall only interrupt him.” My cousin started from his reverie, and snatching her hand, exclaimed— “I entreat you not to leave me; I have much to say;—and Heaven knows when I shall have another opportunity.” Isabella laughed at Sir Sidney's impressive manner, and, taking my arm, advanced towards the library door.
“Walsingham,” cried my cousin, “I conjure you not to require Miss Hanbury's company: I am too unhappy already to bear an accumulation of distress.”
I looked an appeal to Isabella; she stopped, and seemed undecided.
[Page 335]
“If it is a matter of indifference,” said I, with more petulance than wisdom, “pray do not hesitate to gratify Sir Sidney; perhaps, that which he has to communicate will interest you nearly, and I have nothing to disclose but what you know already.” She hesitated no longer, but with a smile, half piqued and half reproving, accompanied me towards the park.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
[Page ]
VOL. II.
[Page ]
CHAP. XXIII. We had scarcely advanced ten paces, when a shriek from Lady Aubrey's dressing-room, the windows of which were open, arrested our footsteps. Miss Hanbury flew towards the house, we followed. On entering the apartment from which the alarm proceeded, we beheld Lady Aubrey pale, and unable to utter a syllable, holding Sir Sidney's arm, whose hand grasped a pistol, and whose whole frame was convulsed with agitation. I rushed forward, and
[Page 2]
wrenched the instrument of death from his trembling hand; he fell upon my shoulder, and seemed to lose all sensation. His lips and cheeks were white, and cold as marble; Isabella shrieked. “He will die!” exclaimed she; “O God!—he is dying!”
Sir Sidney revived—“Would to Heaven I were so happy!” said he, feebly; “for such complicated miseries are not to be supported!—To adore one object—to deceive another—It were better that I should expire.” Isabella could not suppress her tears; they flowed spontaneously, notwithstanding all her efforts to repel them. Her bosom was not wholly devoid of pity; but the sentiment of nature overpowered the efforts of humanity. My pangs were infinite! while the torturing consciousness of what I suffered taught me to feel commiseration, even for my rival. Sir Sidney observed the agonies of my
[Page 3]
soul; they were delineated in every feature of my distorted visage; they presented an unsophisticated epitome of the mind's chaos: my brain shudders at the recollection of what I then suffered.
Sir Sidney entreated me to leave him. “If you have one atom of mercy in your bosom, I conjure you to be gone,” said he. The tone of his voice smote my heart; it was wild, yet sad; and though tender, energetic. “Let us leave him with Walsingham,” said my aunt. She quitted the room, followed by Colonel Aubrey and Isabella.
As soon as they were gone, Sir Sidney looked mournfully at the pistol which lay on the carpet—“Oh, Walsingham!” exclaimed he, “what a devoted wretch am I! What a despicable, monstrous hypocrite! Could you behold my palpitating heart; could you but read the dark and cureless sorrows
[Page 4]
of my destiny—” His articulation was suspended by the conflicts of his mind during several moments, when he, suddenly pressing his hand to his forehead, continued, “My brain is burning with mental agony!—Oh, Nature! hast thou no pity for thy child, thy victim?”—I knew not what to say, or how to meliorate his acute sufferings: I entreated him to tranquillize his mind, and to obey the dictates of reason. He smiled, and shook his head with a melancholy expression. “You counsel wisely,” said he; “but can you exemplify the doctrines you inculcate? Can you behold the object of your fondest hopes wrested from you, and say, with truth, that reason will instruct you to be patient?”—I felt conviction throb within my bosom;—I was silent.
“Walsingham,” continued Sir Sidney, “either you must depart, or I must perish: I could unfold a scene of
[Page 5]
horrors so complicated, so terrible, that my soul shudders at the idea of their continuance!—Isabella—”
“What of her?” interrupted I, eagerly.
“Isabella loves you, Walsingham!” answered Sir Sidney, with a faultering voice; “but she never must be your's: I cannot live to see it. Promise me that you will not think of her—”
“You are frantic,” said I.
“Almost, indeed!” replied my cousin; “but your promise—”
“I cannot pledge my word to any injunction so perfectly ridiculous,” answered I. “Indeed, even were our affections at our own disposal, the unreasonable demand you make would prevent the possibility of a compliance, mean and derogatory to the principles of my nature. The most unpardonable despot is he who would shackle the mind:—I cannot, I will not relinquish Isabella.”
[Page 6]
“That is your determination?” cried Sir Sidney, hastily.
“Irrevocably,” answered I.
“Then, Walsingham, farewel for ever!” exclaimed my cousin, darting out of the apartment, and leaving me perplexed in the extreme.
I descended to the park, where I met Mr. Hanbury: I told him what had passed, and he advised me to return to college. “It is merely a boyish passion,” said he; “and, most probably, will not be lasting. Lady Aubrey will never consent to an alliance between Sir Sidney and my sister, and Isabella's pride will prove an insuperable bar to a clandestine union.” His words bewildered my imagination. I had concluded from his former conversation, that Mr. Hanbury was assured of Lady Aubrey's consent, and that the marriage was considered as an affair of certainty. After a short pause I resumed
[Page 7]
the discourse. “If you sanction the addresses of Sir Sidney, Lady Aubrey will not be averse to their success,” said I. “Where can the heir of Glenowen find so honourable an alliance? so amiable, so fascinating a wife as Isabella? She will embellish the fortune which she will command; she will be the pride, the ornament, the blessing of Sir Sidney's family.”
“Never, with my consent,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury.—I started; he proceeded. “From her infancy I have considered her as your promised wife; I have fashioned your minds to blend in the sweet unison of unambitious love; I have anticipated the hour when your virtues would embellish the calm vale of life, enliven its most dreary scenes, and smooth every path towards immortality. The wealth, the splendour which Sir Sidney can bestow, will not compensate for the loss of mental pleasures,
[Page 8]
nursed in the silent haunts of solitude and virtue.”
I listened with rapture; my heart beat high, and my blood quickened in circulation with every word he uttered. A pause again ensued, which lasted till we reached the library.
Lady Aubrey informed us that Sir Sidney was somewhat more composed, but that he chose, during the remainder of the day, to continue in his chamber.
The conflicts, which the various sensations of the morning had produced in my mind, almost benumbed its recollection. I had never avowed a passion for Isabella; I had not, till Sir Sidney's return, even betrayed a wish beyond that of the purest friendship. The generous avowal of approbation from the lips of my tutor, encouraged me to hope; and hope, like the dew of Heaven, while it cherishes the buds of affection, calls forth all that can sweeten
[Page 9]
life, or adorn humanity. Cold must that heart have been which Isabella could not interest!—I leave you, Rosanna, to judge what I experienced, impressed with the most enthusiastic fondness, formed in our days of childhood, and consecrated by the sympathies of reason.
Still Isabella seemed anxious for the fate of Sir Sidney. She remained at the manor-house till late in the evening, and frequently sent inquiries to his chamber, expressed in terms of unusual solicitude. At midnight we returned to the parsonage: the weather was clear; and we strolled slowly along the park. Mr. Hanbury questioned his sister respecting the conduct of Sir Sidney, and in the most unequivocal language demanded her confidence. She assured him that no professions of love for her had ever escaped his lips.
[Page 10]
I listened with an anxious heart, and was almost inclined to fashion my credulity by the tenor of my wishes. There was an air of sincerity in Isabella's declaration, which was sufficient to silence the fears of scepticism. She had, from her infancy, been taught to revere the dignity of truth; and I had not courage to become an apostate before the oracle of my faith—the object of my idolatry!
CHAP. XXIV. On the following morning, Colonel Aubrey came early to the parsonage: Mr. Hanbury and Isabella were absent, and, as he found me alone, our discourse turned on the conduct of my aunt, and Sir Sidney's rash attempt on his own life.
[Page 11]
Colonel Aubrey's manner indicated a mind labouring to unfold some hidden secret: he walked about with an evident uneasiness, which, at times, broke forth in half-suppressed ejaculations, and at others absorbed him in profound silence. At length, after many unsuccessful attempts to quit the room, he took hold of my arm, and, leading me towards the garden, seriously addressed me:—“Mr. Ainsforth,” said he, “there certainly is some dreadful cause for my nephew's inquietude, beyond his passion for Isabella Hanbury. I heard a conversation this morning in Lady Aubrey's dressing-room, which is adjoining to the chamber where I slept, and there does not remain a doubt in my mind of its importance. I will endeavour to repeat what passed, as nearly as I can be correct; for my nephew's voice was often low and inarticulate, as though he laboured under extreme agitation.”
[Page 12]
“For Heaven's sake be brief,” said I.
“Lady Aubrey,” continued he, “reproved her son for his rash and criminal conduct. ‘Reflect for a momoment,’ said she, ‘and recover your fortitude. Think what degradation would follow the step which you meditate: what ruin to yourself, what disgrace to your family.’
‘Am I then to be the victim of ambition?’ replied Sir Sidney; ‘are the despicable distinctions of fortune to shackle all my hopes, darken all my prospects, and bend me to an untimely grave? Are all the energies of the soul to be subdued by the triumphs of pride and duplicity?—The cheek may wear the smile of contentment, even when the heart is wrung with remorse; the eye put on the vivacity of joy, and glisten through the tears of agonizing compunction; but nature will speak in frequent whispers to the feeling mind,
[Page 13]
and there is no sound that can overpower the voice of conscience.’
‘Reflect on the criminality of selfannihilation!’ said Lady Aubrey.
‘Is it not virtue to perish,’ said Sir Sidney, ‘when it is infamy to live? The day of retribution must come; and the longer I exist, the more will my guilt accumulate.’
‘But a passion so absurd, so degrading!’ cried Lady Aubrey.
‘Can we command the affections of the heart?’ replied Sir Sidney. ‘Can we resist the instinctive impulse which is inherent to our natures?’
‘Yet I conjure you to conquer this base infatuation. The hour of repentance will arrive when your miseries will be irremediable,’ said Lady Aubrey.
‘Then let it come!’ interrupted Sir Sidney, raising his voice with impetuosity; ‘if I have courage to meet death, I have equal resolution to bear
[Page 14]
the frowns of fortune. O God! thou knowest, that, with the being I am destined to idolize, I could live contentedly on the summit of a mountain.’
‘Romantic folly’ exclaimed Lady Aubrey: ‘this is the language of a maniac!’
‘Then truth is frenzy,’ replied Sir Sidney. ‘If the agonizing conflicts of a breaking heart cannot awaken pity in your bosom, how shall I address you? In what language shall I urge you to be just? How obtain your sanction to throw off the veil of infamy beneath which my cheek glows with shame and self-reproach? The wants of Colonel Aubrey, the gloom of poverty which overshadows the laurels he has won, and his inestimable virtues, so long neglected, combine to awaken pangs which nothing can alleviate. Will you doom an only child to the slow and certain agonies of despair?’
[Page 15]
‘I cannot yield you up to the sneers and insults of the world; I cannot behold you wedded to one so much beneath you,’ replied the inexorable mother.
‘Then I will follow Colonel Aubrey's fortune,’ cried Sir Sidney. ‘I will accompany him to Gibraltar.’ He hesitated, and, receiving no reply, continued, ‘you do not answer me. Unkind and cruel parent! Think that you behold me the lifeless victim of ambition! Feel the touch of nature; let it vibrate on your heart; let it penetrate those fibres, which are become almost insensible to the pleadings of humanity. Do not, by sacrificing me, heap on your own soul the punishment of eternal anguish.’
“Lady Aubrey was silent, but I could distinctly hear her weep and sob incessantly.
“Sir Sidney resumed his intreaties: ‘I will this day unburden my full heart
[Page 16]
to Isabella:—I will tell her all I feel, all I anticipate; for I cannot, I will not live to see her the wife of Walsingham.’
‘They were educated together: their situations in life are similar: the union would be sanctioned by equality,’ replied Lady Aubrey. ‘Your cousin is a proper husband for the sister of Mr. Hanbury.’
‘Perish all distinctions, but those, which originate in mental superiority!’ exclaimed my nephew. ‘What am I, amidst the profusion of wealth which chance has heaped around me? A monster of dissimulation! a wretch, weighed down with guilt! a vile, degraded, infamous, and sordid hypocrite! But before I sleep again, this misery shall terminate. I will destroy the spell which threatens to benumb the warmest affections of my heart. I will separate Isa-
[Page 17]
bella and Walsingham, or I will cease to breath.’
“Lady Aubrey again remonstrated: Sir Sidney persevered in his determination, till she left him in a paroxysm of rage.
“I heard him traversing his apartment during more than half an hour, talking wildly to himself, and cursing his unhappy fortune with all the vehemence of despair; while your name and that of Miss Hanbury were several times uttered with an agonized tone, which convinced me that you were the cause of his distraction.”
Colonel Aubrey having concluded his account of the morning's interview, requested to hear my opinion. I had not power to speak. “It is evident,” cried he, “that Isabella's want of rank and fortune excludes her from Lady Aubrey's favour. The boy is animated with a passion which can only be subdued by
[Page 18]
time and reason: leave him to the united powers of both; you can rely on Isabella's virtue; and you know the inexorable heart which will never consent to their union. I shall set out for Bath in a few days; have you resolution to be the companion of my journey?”
“This night you shall have my answer,” said I. “The event is too important to admit of a decision hasty or imprudent. If Isabella loves Sir Sidney, my conduct shall be firm, my resolution invincible.”—We were interrupted by Mr. Hanbury; I took Colonel Aubrey aside; conjured him not to divulge what had passed, and promised to talk farther with him on the business at the close of evening. Oh, Rosanna! what were my sorrows! I considered myself as a being, devoted to anguish. Poor, and dependent; could I mediate a selfish wish, when splendour, happiness, and rank awaited on Isabella?
[Page 19]
The kind and manly conduct of Colonel Aubrey inspired me with a sort of desperate resolution, which is often the substitute for genuine fortitude. I was hampered in the toil, and had no hope of escaping, but by an effort, which would either restore my peace of mind, or annihilate me. I demanded of my heart whether its gratification, or Isabella's happiness, was its primary object. I trembled while I asked the important question;—I trembled, not for myself, but for the idol of my affections. Reason is sometimes subservient to our caprices; but the noblest passions of the human breast triumph in union with virtue, and shrink with equal disgust from the meanness of deception, and the baseness of dishonour.
I remained more than an hour in the arbour which had been endeared by the innocent delights of childhood, and consecrated by the affections of nature.
[Page 20]
All that had passed, served only to contrast the sombre aspect of present events. I found my perplexities almost insupportable: I reproached myself for that tacit acquiescence, which yielded up my hopes without even an effort to accomplish them. Man, without energy, is like the vessel which, wanting a pilot's aid, is borne along a sea of sorrows, helpless and despairing! Every blast annoys him; every coming wave threatens his destruction, till he is ingulphed, and lost for ever! Such were my reflections; they roused me from the stupor of affliction; they awakened me to know myself; to see the peril of my situation, and to arm my soul for every approaching trial.
[Page 21]
CHAP. XXV. I hastened without delay to the manorhouse, where I found Sir Sidney, in the library, writing, and alone. I felt that the moment when the crisis of my fate approached, was not to be lost in trifling ceremonies, or employed in useless conversation. My cousin's peace of mind was equally interested with my own. Isabella's hopes, her felicity, her affections, were at stake, and I resolved on being explicit. Sir Sidney rose as I approached him: “Walsingham,” said he, with a mixture of reproof and sorrow, “why do you persecute me? am I not sufficiently unhappy?”
“I came hither,” answered I, “with the hope of finding Isabella: business of the utmost importance requires an immediate and final interview;—but it
[Page 22]
must be private: what I have to communicate will be decisive.”
“A private interview with Isabella! and on business of importance!” cried Sir Sidney, “what can it mean? Oh, Walsingham! what is it you meditate? Tell me, I conjure you;—every sentiment of my heart is interested in the question. Do you mean to marry Isabella?”
I made no reply: he grasped my hand and held it firmly. “Answer me quickly,” continued he, “for the period is now arrived when your language must be unequivocal. I insist—I demand to know your intentions.”
“By what authority?”
“By all the claims of honour and sincerity!” continued Sir Sidney. “If you are determined to make Isabella your wife, there is but one step for me to take.” He paused:—I smiled at the implied menace:—my breast panted
[Page 23]
with rage and indignation:—he continued. “Your silence is an acknowledgment of your purpose. Then hear me, Walsingham. Since the possession of Isabella can alone constitute your happiness, I will forbear to persecute you. I will be the victim; but on one condition only.”
“Name it,” said I briefly.
“That you will permit me to question, to examine her heart; to hear my conviction from her own lips, and to place the matter beyond the very shadow of uncertainty, by demanding a candid avowal of her sentiments. If Isabella loves you, no sound of reproach shall ever disturb your tranquillity;—an eternal silence shall be your safeguard, and my penance.”
A thousand painful ideas rushed across my brain: the heroic bosom, which could relinquish its fondest wishes, its dearest hopes, to promote my felicity,
[Page 24]
shamed me into generosity. I could not bear to be vanquished by superior fortitude; and, in the vaunting pride of the moment, I promised to resign Isabella for ever.
Sir Sidney fell upon my neck and wept. Every vein within my heart was wrung to torture. The library door was open, and I observed Miss Hanbury advancing through the park. The conflict was terrible. I longed to take a last farewel; to explain my motives, and to hear one kind, one gentle adieu before we separated eternally. I broke abruptly form Sir Sidney, and quitted the room. Colonel Aubrey joined Isabella, and they turned towards the wood. All the torments of despair and jealousy conspired in a terrific phalanx to overturn my reason. I resolved to quit Glenowen, to seek, in some far distant country, an asylum, where I might end my days of sorrow, unknown, and consequently
[Page 25]
unlamented. But the means of subsistence till I could reach the spot of destination—how were they to be acquired? A project occurred, uncertain as it was desperate—I hesitated a moment, and then flew to find Lady Aubrey.
She was in her chamber; the magnitude of my distress, the event which hurried me on to madness, made me forgetful of the decorum which at any other period I should not have violated—I knocked hastily at the door of her apartment, she bade me enter: I started back almost petrified with surprize, for the first object that met my eye was the ivory cabinet which, with all my remaining hopes, I had entrusted to the care of Mr. Hanbury.
The conversation which had passed between us at the parsonage was fully elucidated: I now beheld the object which he had wished me to resign, and
[Page 26]
which he considered it dishonourable to retain. I had consented to his restoring it; I had only to blame myself for that impetuosity which shrunk from a cool and temperate explanation. My looks betrayed the perturbation of my mind; —they terrified Lady Aubrey—she rose abruptly from her seat, and would have passed towards the door: I caught her arm and held her—“You go not, madam,” said I sternly, “You, move not, while I have strength to hold you: the hour is come when we must lay aside the trivial forms of ceremony, and speak without reserve.”
She trembled and grew pale.
There are situations where we can pity the frailty which prompted even the most atrocious injury—but it must be when the heart is softened, not when distress and persecution have steeled it to resistance; we then behold our enemy without compassion; and if the sentiment
[Page 27]
of revenge be subdued by the efforts of reason, the pride of scorn only acquires new vigour by the conquest.
Lady Aubrey's timidity was the result of guilt: her eyes involuntarily turned with a ghastly expression, towards the cabinet. Every glance augmented my indignation; she struggled to get from me—she shrieked—I commanded her to be silent—“If you wish to avoid eternal disgrace,” said I, “you will restrain your rage, and, without compulsion, discover the contents of that repository: my situation is desperate, and I will be obeyed.”
Lady Aubrey shook in every joint; the cold drops stood, like witnesses of her guilt, on her livid forehead; her hesitation irritated my already desperate mind, and I led her, by force, towards the cabinet.
Rosanna! what a tremendous moment did I pass!—On the ivory lid lay
[Page 28]
Sir Sidney's pistol—it had been removed from his chamber by Lady Aubrey, the preceding evening.
Still she resisted, and still I grasped her arm. “What do you demand?” cried she; “Is it my life?”
“Heaven forbid,” said I, “that the injuries and insults which you have heaped upon me, should urge my hand to attempt a crime so horrible! I demand the key of this cabinet, this precious secret repository, which, if I mistake not, contains the fiat of my destiny. I snatched it from the flames; sate placed it in my possession; the nice sense of honour, which ever actuates the mind of my tutor, induced him to restore it; but now the hour of retribution is come; and justice will prevail, in defiance of all your machinations.”
She drew a key from her pocket, and with a trembling hand presented it to me: I turned to open the folding doors
[Page 29]
in the front of the cabinet, when she seized the pistol, and presenting it to my breast, bade me desist. At this moment Mrs. Blagden entered the room; her shrieks arrested my hand, just as I discovered that the key which I had received from Lady Aubrey was a false one, merely given to divert my attention, and to favour her infernal purpose. Mrs. Blagden, who knew by the situation in which she found me, the motive which led me thither, was too prudent to alarm the family; and I was so completely exhausted by agitation, that I could then make no farther trial respecting the mystery of the cabinet. I however resolved to use every precaution against future villany. Lady Aubrey's terrors convinced me that something of importance was concealed from the eye of justice; therefore, after leading her and Mrs. Blagden out of the room, I
[Page 30]
fastened the door, and went immediately in search of Mr. Hanbury.
I darted forward, unconscious whither I was going. I hurried through the woods; I climbed the steep and rugged mountain, wild and distracted! Evening closed, and the deepening shades of twilight gathered round me. Twice I advanced to the margin of a jutting eminence, resolved to dash my wretched form amidst the airy abysc, and to end my agonies with my weary existence; but the cowardice which is imputed to suicide—the disgrace which follows the memory of the victim whose sorrows become predominant over his reasoning faculties, restrained me: I reflected; I resolved to live—to be a sad and lingering example of the persecutions of fortune, the injustice of—Hold! what am I writing? Heaven will pardon the idea; it was unpremeditated; and you,
[Page 31]
amiable Rosanna, will pity the despair which gave it a momentary sanction.
CHAP. XXVI. I Determined that night to discover the mystery of the cabinet, to open it in the presence of the whole family, and to reveal my reasons for so doing previous to the experiment; if I failed in my project, I also resolved to quit Glenowen for ever; it was therefore necessary that I should return to the parsonage, and prepare every thing for my journey.
As soon as day shut in, I descended the rough slope, and hastened towards the asylum of my youth, the abode of virtue, the scene of past delight, the spot in which I should entomb every
[Page 32]
hope of earthly happiness. The only road lay through the park: my heart was bursting with agony—my brain scorched with the fever of despair— when I passed the manor house.—How shall I describe what followed?
The evening was sultry; the library windows facing the park were open to the ground, and several lights were burning in different parts of the room. Arrested by an undescribable impulse, I stopped: on a sofa near the window sat Isabella and Sir Sidney: he was talking earnestly to her; she was bathed in tears: his cheek reclined upon her bosom—she kissed his forehead! I saw no more—I fled.
The gloom on every side seemed to deepen with new horrors! I rushed forward, as if borne by supernatural power; I passed through the churchyard —the grave of my mother received my last agonized tear; I threw myself
[Page 33]
on my knees beside the simple stone that recorded her virtues: how still, how solemn seemed every thing around me! The night-breeze stole unheard over the bleak and losty mountain; the thin mist rapidly floated along the valley. I cast a wistful look towards Glenowen; the lights were visible in the library—I groaned—I shuddered! The recollection of my project vanished; a deeper, a more torturing wound was inflicted than any that adversity could bestow.— What object remained to charm my senses?—What pleasure could fortune yield amidst the agonies of despair?— None!
I entered the garden; the bower of youthful joys and mental cultivation was the next object I beheld. The moon just rose above the mountain, its first pale rays fell on the dark foliage, while it covered the hoops of osier woven by my hand when love and hope conspired
[Page 34]
to guide it. I entered the parsonage, and hurried to my chamber: on a table lay my pistols—they were loaded; I armed myself, and descended. The high road lay at no great distance, but I had again to cross the corner of the park: all the sorrows of my life recurred at that dreadful moment; I recollected my continental journey from Glenowen; the early neglect of Lady Aubrey; the agonies that my little bosom felt when Sir Sidney first supplanted me. I was fit for any desperate deed of horror—I could have “drunk hot blood!” The remembrance of my situation, even at this distant period, is terrible!
Passing a narrow wood which skirted the park, I heard some one approaching. The moon's feeble light barely rendered the surrounding objects visible. The sound of voices continued, and, in a few moments, Isabella approached, leaning on the arm of Sir Sidney Aubrey:
[Page 35]
at that instant an idea smote my brain, big with the blackest crime!—I shivered with conscious horror, while my hand grasped my pistol, and my tortured soul meditated murder !
They turned an angle, and continued to walk slowly. The brightness of the moon increased as it emerged from the horizon; I followed them at a convenient distance, and heard their conversation. The soft turf prevented their hearing my footsteps, and the thickness of the plantation afforded me many opportunities for concealment.
“Generous girl! dearest Isabella!” cried Sir Sidney, “remember your promise, and our attachment shall be inviolable. What a sacrifice have you made, for a being lost and wretched as I am! How shall I repay your goodness? My mother's cruel and ambitious spirit will prevent my marrying; I know it will; but my obligation to you will not be
[Page 36]
diminished by her inhumanity. I shall feel my heart, and all its grateful sentiments, bound to you for ever.”
Isabella was silent; my indignation scarcely could refrain from committing an act of violence, while my hand grasped the instrument of death with a rigidity which rendered it motionless. Sir Sidney continued—
“We will return to Switzerland; you shall be my dear and inseparable associate: I will, by every kind and affectionate assiduity, teach you to forget the ill-fated Walsingham. I have opened my heart to you, Isabella; you have explored its innermost recesses. You must, by your pity and forgiveness, alleviate my sorrows. We will wander amidst Alpine scenery, we will imbibe the refreshing breezes of morning, and scatter with our footsteps the soft dews of the summer twilight. In the sultry season we will mingle with the happy peasantry;
[Page 37]
and when the storms shall sweep the mountains of eternal snow, we will visit their abodes, and cheer them with that plenty which dark and freezing skies would otherwise deny them. Indeed, Isabella, we will never separate. The world and its vicissitudes shall be forgotten in the sweet and lasting intercourse of truth and sympathy.”
The moon-beams fell exactly on the path where they strolled: Sir Sidney's arm encircled Isabella's waist, while her's was thrown carelessly over his shoulder. My brain was convulsed—the woods seemed to wave before me, as though they were shook by a trembling of the earth; the wind began to rise, it moaned over the mountains. I quickened my pace, and followed nearer their footsteps. At a small distance the path terminated in a dark and almost impervious wood of more than half a mile in length. Isabella again addressed Sir Sidney.—
[Page 38]
“Poor Walsingham!” said she; “he seems to be the very sport of fortune! I have loved him as a brother, but, rather than you should perish, I have resigned him. We will fly from Glenowen, dearest Sidney; we will seek in solitude the repose you anticipate. I will devote my days to the task of participating your fate. I know that you can never marry without exposing yourself to ruin and disgrace by disobeying the commands of Lady Aubrey; yet we will not separate: I will mock the world's surmises; and, by the zeal and fidelity of my attachment, deprecate its scorn. Yet you must allow me sometimes to bestow a sigh when I think of your unhappy cousin.”
“Name him not,” interrupted Sir Sidney: “if you wish not to destroy my peace of mind, oh! never name him: he must be forgotten!”
[Page 39]
Barbarian! thought I, why must the unhappy Walsingham be forgotten? Why refused a tribute of remembrance? Have you not blighted all his hopes; rendered his remaining days a dark perspective; withered his youth by misery, and triumphed over all the affections of his heart? Is memory to be closed against his sorrows, and is his very name to be forgotten?
They entered the wood;—I could just distinguish the white drapery of Isabella's dress, whenever a vertical beam darted among the branches. After walking some time without uttering a syllable, Sir Sidney again broke the silence.
“Swear never to reveal what has passed between us.”
“I have already sworn,” answered Isabella.
“Not even to your brother—”
“To no mortal breathing,” replied Miss Hanbury.
[Page 40]
“My mother's resentment would be implacable,” cried my cousin; “I should be despised, accounted infamous—”
My agitation increased, as it blended the pangs of jealousy with the indignation of resentment. There remained not a doubt, from the conversation I had overheard, but that Sir Sidney was the seducer of Isabella: the libertine who had robbed her of her honour, and under the specious language of sentiment and affection, now soothed her into a promise of eternal secrecy. All the sufferings which I had witnessed in the mind of the betrayer, were recollected with an augmentation of disgust; they only proved,
                                         —“when the blood burns,
“How prodigal the soullends the tongue words 5 .”
I considered Isabella as the dupe of her own vanity; and deemed the profligate
[Page 41]
on whom she had lavished the treasure of her honour, as doubly culpable, because he was pre-eminently gifted with powers of mind, which should have been his guide, and her best safeguard. The subtlety of licentious villany is commonly the associate of men, old in vice, and practised in dissimulation: Sir Sidney's youth and inexperience were ill suited to the machinations of seduction; and I concluded that Isabella was more than half to blame, in yielding to his passion.
My cousin again awoke me from my torturing reverie by resuming the conversation: —“Poor Walsingham!” exclaimed he; “I have, for a time, deprived him of happiness; but half my fortune shall be his. I will place him above the persecutions of the world, the miseries of dependance. He preserved my life, when I was an infant, and his must not be devoted to sorrow.”
[Page 42]
The pistols now trembled in my hands: his kindness disarmed my rage; but my misery was rendered more acute, by the restraint which my feelings placed upon my vengeance.
The first sensation of gratitude was soon succeeded by conscious abhorrence. I considered myself as a mean and miserable accomplice in the ruin of Isabella; as a wretch whose indignation and just sense of honour were to be subdued by base and interested prospects. Shall I accept Sir Sidney's friendship? thought I. Shall I become blind to his vices; the keeper of his secrets; the minion of his profligate pursuits? The idea made me shiver with repugnance; I was close on the footsteps of that being, whom I considered as the vilest of the human race;—the woman, whose frailty excited my contempt: yet, Rosanna, I envied the monster I despised—and still loved;
[Page 43]
yes, tenderly loved the victim I contemned.
On entering a glade, which opened to the park nearly facing the manor-house, Sir Sidney abruptly stopped. “Oh God!” exclaimed he, “how shall I obliterate the sorrows I have heaped on Walsingham?”
“By consigning them to the grave!” said I wildly, rushing forward, and presenting one of the pistols, which I still held with a convulsed and burning hand. He started. “The moment is come,” continued I, “when one of us must perish. The voice of violated honour, the cause of ruined innocence, combine to accuse, and to condemn you. The task of justice devolves on me; therefore it is useless to protract the fatal hour. This pistol is already loaded; take it, and name your distance.”
“This is insanity,” cried my cousin, putting aside the pistol.
[Page 44]
“Then have a care how far you tempt a maniac,” said I, with a firm and indignant voice, which convinced my adversary that I was in no jesting humour.
“You will not assassinate me,” said he calmly. “Ah! Walsingham! Do I deserve to perish by your hand?”
“I scorn the imputation,” answered I; “I have a second pistol, and demand that honourable retribution which the laws of society have long since sanctioned.”
“What law can sanction murder?” said Sir Sidney, throwing the pistol on the turf.
Isabella fell prostrate before me; she clasped my knees, and, bathed in tears, conjured me to desist. “Sir Sidney must not, shall not obey your cruel injunctions,” said she, almost suffocated by the torrents which bathed her wild and frenzied features:—“You know
[Page 45]
not what you meditate. He is your friend.”
“I reject his friendship,” answered I. “The favour of a villain, disgraces the being whom it is meant to benefit.”
Sir Sidney looked earnestly at me. The clear light, which was now wholly unintercepted, displayed his features, and they bore the placid smile of defiance. Again I presented the pistol;—he took it:—Isabella clasped my neck;—she hung round me;—she could not speak; —her cheek, burning through tears, touched mine: I felt a convulsive throbbing in my heart; her agitation enflamed my jealousy, and augmented my despair. I threw her from me, and she fell senseless on the turf: her countenance was ghastly, her eyes were closed. Sir Sidney knelt beside her; he raised her on his arm; he kissed her cheek:—“Poor Isabella!” exclaimed he; “I was born to be thy destroyer!”
[Page 46]
“Monster unequalled!” said I, “either give me the satisfaction I demand, or expect to receive the chastisement which infamy and cowardice deserve from injured honour!”
He rose, and with a firm voice replied, “I value life too little to refuse the challenge—fire.”
I pulled the trigger;—the ball missed my antagonist, who instantly discharged his pistol in the air. The report alarmed the family;—the domestics came running towards us:—I heard Colonel Aubrey's voice:—for Isabella's sake I dreaded an explanation: and, bewildered by contending agonies, escaped, leaving Sir Sidney to explain the adventure.
[Page 47]
CHAP. XXVII. I continued to walk hastily along the highway till day-break, when a heavy shower made me take shelter under a clump of firs, which covered a small eminence by the road side. The tops of the mountains which screened Glenowen met my eyes; the light vapours floated over them, and their dark verdure served to contrast the bright blue sky, which the tepid shower had left unclouded. Every leaf was spangled with drops of rain, and the freshness of the morning air passing over the meadows, revived my senses, almost annihilated by the anguish of reflection.
As the mind settled into a deep despondency, the powers of memory became more minutely correct: every
[Page 48]
scene was depicted in vivid colours, every object re-animated before me. The solitudes of Glenowen, from which I considered myself as banished for ever, seemed to hold a charm that hung about my heart, and weighed it down with sadness. Self-exiled, yet self-acquitted, I knew not whither I was going. I had left Isabella senseless, perhaps dead! Sir Sidney distracted. I had abandoned my kind, my generous tutor; rejected the liberal proposal made by Colonel Aubrey; and deserted my home like a guilty coward! Yet, so perverse was my destiny, that the very step which would have exculpated me, would have criminated Sir Sidney, and stigmatized the fame of Isabella. Weak and erring as I believed her to be, I still loved her; and feeling that my return to Glenowen would be the cause of her inevitable banishment, with a breaking heart I pursued my melancholy journey.
[Page 49]
The prospect from which I was every moment receding, seemed to acquire new beauty as it lessened in perspective. Weary and exhausted, I took my seat on the root of a venerable tree, and, rapt in melancholy ruminations, wrote the following stanzas:
The savage hunter, who afar
   On some rude mountain's pathless height
Sees, in the west, the twilight star
   Just peering on the brow of night;
O'er cliffs of ice, and plains of snow,
   Still bends his long and lonesome way,
And, as he tempts the famish'd foe,
   Anticipates the joys of day:
For he, by hope inspir'd, surveys
   The moon's wan lustre gild the dome
That on some jutting point displays,
   O blest retreat! his cavern'd home;
Where, when the journeying sun shall fade,
   And cold oblivion's reign return,
The torch of love shall chear the shade,
   And, 'midst the frozen desart, burn.
[Page 50]
For love can warm the shiv'ring breast,
   And bid Siberian fierceness sigh;
Make flinty caves the house of rest,
   And mock, with joy, the frowning sky.
But I, who taste no pleasing dreams
   To smooth the paths of endless care,
Shall darkness know, 'mid sunny beams,
   And find, in bow'rs of bliss, despair!
I was awakened from my slumber of imagination by the sound of a horse's hoofs, which advanced on full gallop. On a nearer view I recognized one of the domestics from Glenowen, and believing that he was dispatched to apprehend me for having attempted the life of Sir Sidney Aubrey, I resolved to resist, whatever consequences might follow. For this purpose I descended rapidly, and taking my post by the road side, awaited his approach. He perceived my mistake, and my determined manner excited a smile, as he stretched forth his hand, and presented two letters. I opened them hastily:
[Page 51]
one bore the signature of Sir Sidney, the other of Colonel Aubrey. A small public house was within sight, and I dismissed the servant with a message, that I would send answers to both the packets as soon as I could write them.
With perturbation that was almost insupportable, I began to read Sir Sidney's letter; when the following contents overwhelmed me with sorrow:
“You fly, Walsingham, with an agonized mind, and the additional pang of supposing that you leave behind you a name tarnished with reproach. Tranquillize your wounded spirit, and rest assured that the events of last night never will be divulged: I have enjoined Isabella to secresy. Lady Aubrey supposes that the pistol was fired by me, and is at a loss to account for your precipitate retreat from Glenowen.
“Walsingham! to what a trial has my fatal passion reduced you!—how
[Page 52]
important has been the sacrifice which you have made for my repose:—for my repose !—alas! that word must be erased from the tablet of my fate for ever!
“I conjure you to be careful of your safety; to combat your adverse fortune with the heroism of exalted virtue; and to accept, from one who loves you dearer than a brother, an income which will place you above the humiliations of dependence. This small return is due to you, as my relation, my friend, and my preserver, even had you never relinquished Isabella,—the pure, the generous, the heroic Isabella.
“I inclose a letter to my mother's banker, with instructions to secure to you an annuity of four hundred pounds, and to pay into your hands one thousand for your immediate necessities. Reject not the paltry tribute: add not to my sorrows the regret of knowing
[Page 53]
that I have lost your friendship; and believe me, when I swear by all that is dear to honour or sacred to sentiment, that my good wishes towards you shall never cease but with my existence. This world has few pleasures for a being born to linger in one gloomy round of chilling despondency: my earliest hours were embittered by constraint; my last moments will be devoted to compunction. Ill-fated Isabella! when I think of her—when I behold her earliest attachment blighted by my ungovernable passions—I shrink almost to annihilation. Yet, Walsingham, could I withdraw the mysterious veil which is placed between us, you would not reproach but commiserate my sufferings.
“Your mind, for some days past, has laboured under the dominion of deceptive circumstances: you have contemplated every object through a false medium; your suspicions have magnified
[Page 54]
ills, and your passions created imaginary sorrows. Yet, spare Isabella the anguish of supposing that you are doubtful of her virtue, and exonerate me from the imputation of being her seducer!— She is spotless as the snow upon the mountain: I am incapable of a dishonourable action. It would be little less than imbecile to deceive you at this momentous crisis: throw away the scepticism which will only precipitate you deeper into error, and believe my most solemn assurance, that I never shall be the lover of Isabella.
“Our fondest propensities too frequently betray themselves while we most endeavour to deceive others; nay, even while we think that others are deceived, for our silence will speak in evidence of our weakness, and sometimes more eloquently than the most laboured language. Where then is the lover to fly from detection? where is
[Page 55]
he to conceal the tyrant of his bosom, except in that deep solitude which would nurse him into madness? Philosophy, with all its boasted powers, cannot subdue the miseries of affection; it may triumph over past ills, or those that are approaching; but present sorrows seldom fail to triumph over philosophy 6 . Let this maxim excite your forgiveness, and plead in extenuation of my conduct—at least as far as it wears the semblance of culpability.
“Walsingham, adieu! I know the human mind too well to bid you be patient; I sympathize too sincerely in your sorrows to hope that admonition can offer them an antidote: I can only conjure you to combat the passions of your heart, and to look forward with confidence to those hours when I shall
[Page 56]
no longer prove an obstacle to their gratification. Farewell!
“ Sidney Aubrey .”
I read the letter again and again: the noble nature of my young and volatile cousin evinced itself in every line. I lamented my own precipitation; I cursed my fate for having pointed my affections towards the object of Sir Sidney's wishes.
Still I could not believe that Isabella was innocent; for the conversation, which I had overheard in the wood on the preceding night, convinced me that she was the victim of my rival's superior attractions, and his mother's unbending ambition.
I hastened towards the small public-house, whose roof I had observed from the plantation of firs, and, as soon as I could procure pen, ink, and paper, wrote the succeeding answer:
[Page 57]
To Sir SIDNEY AUBREY. “I have kept my promise: I have relinquished Isabella, and you will see me no more. The world is now before me; it presents a vast and variegated scene, replete with vicissitudes, and peopled with all sorts of men. Affliction may be my companion, but I trust that I shall not be wholly vanquished by its severity. Born to dependence, fostered by the pity of a stranger, enlightened by the precepts of philanthropy, I commence my solitary journey—friendless, unknown, and wretched! The labyrinths of life present no flowers to my aching senses: all is dreary, and bestrewed with thorns; yet I must pursue my way, or, like a despicable coward, fall, and perish.
“You will, perhaps, blame me for flying; you will call that pusillanimity,
[Page 58]
which is the strongest effort of human fortitude. Your safety, and Isabella's happiness—if she can be happy in the consciousness of dishonour—require my departure. I have resigned every prospect of bliss; I have relinquished every hope of consolation that fancy formed, or ripening reason cherished; I have condemned my proud aspiring heart to an eternal penance. I will learn to suffer, and I will suffer in silence. You shall not feed your passion on my sorrows: Isabella shall never have the power to reproach me.
“I conjure you—since a combination of events has favoured your illicit triumph—I conjure you, by all the rapture which your glowing mind anticipates, to guard Isabella from the malice of the world. Let the fatal secret, which I shudder to remember, be consigned for ever to oblivion. Protect her from the taunts of low malevolence,
[Page 59]
the exultations of her own sex, the licentiousness of yours. In your arms she will forget the sorrows of Walsingham; in the soft luxurious lap of splendour she will cease to lament the purity she has relinquished. Let her, by deeds of virtue, compensate for the chastity she has violated; let the benevolence of her heart evince the glowing affections of her nature, and adorn that cheek with the tear of philanthropy which would else glow with the blush of indiscretion.
“Your proffered independence and your present bounty I reject with scorn; and I charge you, if you value your own safety, never again to insult my pride by supposing that I would accept the means of life from that hand which has robbed it of every treasure. I will toil, I will exert every faculty of my mind; but I never will condescend to receive a benefit from the seducer of Isabella.
[Page 60]
“Every prospect of happiness opened to your view; you were the favourite of fortune, the darling of nature! your mind was gifted proudly, your heart was moulded to receive the impressions of virtue and sensibility! I lament that the gloom of conscious guilt should overshadow the bright perspective, or that the poison of compunction should contaminate the source of every future pleasure: for the demon Conscience is no sophist; the unvarnished admonitions of that power, whose whispers are heard even amidst the loudest din of revelry, will condemn you; and time will scatter thorns upon your pillow, when passion shall retire from the glances of returning reason. Farewell!
“W. A.”
Colonel Aubrey's letter contained only a few lines, and those briefly tendering his friendship, and conjuring me
[Page 61]
to wait for him at Bath. My resolution to enter the army was now the only solace which my mind could experience. I resolved to make the best of my way towards Bristol, to solicit the protection and temporary aid of my early friend Mr. Randolph; and, in case success should attend my experiment, to accept Colonel Aubrey's proposal, and return with him to Gibraltar.
A ten pound note and a few guineas, which I had brought with me from Glenowen, was now all my fortune; I therefore determined to pursue my journey on foot, and by the most rigorous economy to arm myself against the dreadful necessity of soliciting assistance from the proud or ostentatious. I recollected that the sharpest pang which adversity can suffer, is the stern denial of those whose only triumph over enlightened minds springs from the caprices of fortune; who, but for the accursed dross
[Page 62]
which gives consequence to villany, grace to deformity, and the semblance of perfection even to the most degenerate, which can purchase adulation from the vulgar, obedience from the base, and applause from the ignorant, would crouch before the majesty of virtue, and shrink at the effulgence of genius, as the shadows of night fly before the sun and vanish into nothing.
With a dejected mind I approached that ancient city where commerce pours her treasures into the lap of industry, but where genius has often sought in vain for an asylum; where Savage 7 , the unhappy offspring of an inhuman mother, pined in a loathsome prison, and at last expired beneath the persecutions of adversity!—where Chatterton first felt the inspiration of the muses, and trembling left the wild effusions of fancy
[Page 63]
should fail to procure the patronage of pride, concealed beneath the veil of fiction those laurels which same designed to decorate his temples. Poor boy! ill-fated child of genius and of sorrow! long didst thou court the applause of dull and envious minds; often didst thou receive the niggard boon which, while it stung thy sensibility, roused thee to emulation! As I contemplated the sombre spires of thy native city, imagination presented thy form at that moment when thou badst it farewell for ever! Fancy led me to trace the wild enthusiasm which animated thy features, and gave them an expression touching yet terrific! The pride of scorn, the dignity of genius, the pang of fond regret, the dread of want, the consciousness of mental powers, conspired to agitate thy soul, and tear thee from thy kindred. Gentle kindred! who wanted not the will but power to hold thee. Can wealth exonerate
[Page 64]
those relentless beings who saw thee exiled, poor and unpatronized, driven to wander, without a friend to guide thee,—
To live by mental toil, e'en when the brain
Could scarce its trembling faculties sustain;
To mark the dreary minutes slowly creep,
Each day to labour and each night to weep;
Till the last murmur of thy frantic soul
In proud concealment from its mansion stole;
While envy, springing from her lurid cave,
Snatch'd the young laurel from thy rugged grave.
So, the pale primrose, sweetest bud of May,
Scarce wakes to beauty ere it feels decay;
While baleful weeds their hidden poisons pour,
Choke the green sod, and wither ev'ry flow'er!
Oh! Chatterton! when fate shall glance over the solitary waste which ages shall mark with the ravages of time, pity shall consecrate the spot where thou art left to perish! while Nature, scorning the monuments of ignorance and wealth, shall crush them to the centre, and consign the names they bore to eternal oblivion.
[Page 65]
CHAP. XXVIII. On my arrival at Bristol I stopped at the first inn; and after writing a short note to Mr. Randolph, dispatched it by a messenger, whom I ordered to wait for an answer. At any other period, in any other state of mind, I should have obtruded myself on my early patron without ceremony; but sensibility shrinks at the persecutions of fortune, till reason asserts her turn to reign, and arms the mind with fortitude to resist its enemy.
The next task my pen undertook was the task of gratitude, and, with a throbbing heart, I began my confession.
“To the Reverend Walter Hanbury .
“ I know not how to address you; and yet my mind cannot remain tranquil
[Page 66]
under the painful load of conscious accusation. You have, from my earliest infancy, awakened my soul to that emulation, which builds its every hope of happiness on the omnipotence of truth! you have taught me to consider unsullied honour as an invulnerable shield; and I have placed it before my senses in the full confidence of security. You have conjured me never to conceal from you the sensations of my breast; hear, oh! my friend, hear the confessions of that heart, which even your wisdom and philosophy could not arm against the susceptibilities of nature.
“I adored Isabella! she was the object of all my hopes, the arbitress of my destiny. The agonies which assailed my soul became acute in proportion as I felt the necessity of concealing them. Dreadful necessity! thou incentive to sorrow! thou tormentor! whose malice only urges the feeling heart to the last pang
[Page 67]
of self-constraint, which like the subterraneous flame augments as it finds obstruction, and at last bursts forth with ungovernable fury.
“Isabella is amiable, beautiful, and accomplished! What am I? Alas! I dare not think on what I am. Reflection must be deadened, or despair will be triumphant.
“Her form is perpetually before me; I behold her in my waking hours, in fancy I behold her, gliding like a meteor athwart the deep gloom of mental desolation: I close my eyes but to dream of Isabella; I start from my feverish slumbers, but to know that I am wretched.
“Why did you teach me to idolize a phantom formed to mislead me? Why did you unfold the fairest buds of reason only to convince me that they would be prematurely blasted? The dark colour of my fate would have been congenial to a life of study and seclusion; I
[Page 68]
could have braved the tempest which my adverse fortune menaced, had I never basked in the sun-beams of delight. Oh! why was I not inured to anguish? Why did the vision Hope present a gay and rich perspective only to deceive me?
“Isabella was the associate of my childhood, the companion of my studies: our actions, our pursuits, our thoughts, were regulated by sympathy and sanctioned by virtue. We were united by the sweet unison of mind, which harmonized all our faculties. Truth was our monitor; we were enamoured of her precepts, and the path which we trod was strewed with the fairest flowers of fancy: but they were fragile! the wintry tempest scattered them; the leaves are withered, and the thorns alone remain to fester in my bosom.
“A new scene is unfolded to my view; I must rush amidst the turmoil of
[Page 69]
camps; I must repair to fields of carnage, and forget—hard task!—that this world of sorrow is enriched by such a jewel as Isabella! Had I but the consolation to look forward with the hope that my laurels would bloom beneath her smiles, danger would be courted as the harbinger of bliss, and the loudest din of arms be pleasing to my senses.— What will now be the incitement to valour?—Despair! What the object of every enterprize?—Annihilation!
“I shall not recede from the path which your example has set before me; I shall not deviate from the precepts which you have inculcated. My few remaining days shall be dedicated to the service of my country, and my last sigh shall be a sigh of gratitude for your inestimable kindness.
“W. A.”
I waited with impatience for the return of my messenger, and anticipated
[Page 70]
at least a temporary gleam of consolation in the hospitable abode of my early benefactor. Many years had elapsed since I had last seen him; but the impression of gratitude had sunk deeper in my heart by the increasing power of thought and affection. At length the porter returned with the distressing intelligence that Mr. Randolph had quitted Bristol, and dissolved the firm of his house previous to his departure. My disappointment was terrible. Every hope seemed to vanish, and I began to consider myself as the victim of persecution. In a place more famed for opulence than philanthropy, what could I expect? My chagrin was unutterable!
Fatigued by mental anxiety as well as bodily exertion, I retired early to my chamber; but sleep is ever an alien to the feeling mind labouring under the pressure of care and disappointment. I closed my eyes in vain; a thousand visions
[Page 71]
occupied my brain, and tortured it incessantly. At length the mingling hum of sounds beneath my window informed me of the hour, and I descended to the streets, which were thronged with passengers, for the occupations of the day had begun, and every man was busy in the scene of commerce. I strolled to a neighbouring coffee-house, where, having ordered my breakfast, I sat down to ruminate on my forlorn situation. A Bath newspaper lay before me, and the first article which met my eye was the following advertisement—
“Wanted, to accompany a young nobleman on his travels, a private tutor, classically educated, of good morals and respectable connections. His salary will be considerable and his prospects advantageous, provided he renders himself worthy of future patronage. Such a person may hear of a situation by
[Page 72]
sending his name and place of abode to Lady Kencarth's, Hanover Square, London.”
I read the proposal several times; and after weighing it in my own mind, thought it more eligible than my plan of accompanying Colonel Aubrey to Gibraltar. I was eager to know the world, and to travel with a young nobleman was the surest road to the knowledge for which I panted. The change of scenery and diversity of occupations would, I flattered myself, tend more to the restoration of my mind's repose, than the scenes of sanguinary warfare to which a military life would lead me: after a few minutes of cool reflection, I answered the advertisement, and began my breakfast somewhat less perplexed than when I entered the coffee-house.
I had in my letter requested that the answer might be directed to me at the
[Page 73]
Post Office, Bath: I therefore resolved to hasten thither without delay, and to wait patiently for its arrival. An hour before sun-set I quitted Bristol, and proceeded on foot to the place of my next destination.
CHAP. XXIX. The sun, before I had advanced three miles on my journey, began to sink beneath the horizon. I walked slowly; and, deeply ruminating on events past, scarcely knew how the present moments hastened towards the close of day. The deepening shades of twilight began to envelope the surrounding scenery; the air was sultry, the sky overcast with gathering clouds, which in a very short period of time obscured the crimson
[Page 74]
glow which spread itself along the west. I continued to tread my lonely path, till night completely wrapped every object in a temporary oblivion, when at intervals the sound of footsteps at no great distance met my ear, and roused me from my reverie.
I stopped and listened. No star illumined the heavens; no light of any kind enlivened the gloom that surrounded me. Still I pursued my way, and still the stranger followed, till we came to a solitary part of the road, when the sound of his footsteps ceased, and I began to apprehend some mischief. The sky, which had been overcast at the close of evening, now broke into a tempest; the thunder rolled tremendously, and the rain poured in torrents; I was at a loss what to do, when by a flash of vivid lightning, I perceived the person who had followed, standing before me. I drew my pistol from my pocket, and
[Page 75]
suddenly halted. He receded a few steps, and, in a mournful voice, addressed me.—
“Traveller,” said he, “if fortune smiles on you, and benevolence warms your heart, you will succour the unhappy man who is now before you. Too proud to demand charity from those who know me, I adopt this mode of solicitation to spare my breast one half the pang of a refusal.”
Here he paused, and I could distinguish, by the tremulous tone in which he uttered the concluding words, that his agitation checked the capability of proceeding.
The abruptness of his address and the solemnity of the scene around us at first startled me: yet I had not power to hurt the wretched petitioner: I returned my pistol into my pocket. I will not destroy thee, unhappy mortal! thought I, because
[Page 76]
I am a fellow-traveller in the path of affliction.
He continued: “I perceive, by the lightning, that you are armed, and yet I do not tremble: if you will not meliorate my sorrows by a sum, small in comparison with the magnitude of my grief, the most merciful act you can perform will be that of annihilating its victim.” I requested that he would inform me what money would be of use to him, intimating the narrow limits of my power, and my earnest wish that it might not be too circumscribed for the relief of his necessities. After a silence of some minutes, during which we walked slowly, side by side, he resumed the conversation.
“The rectitude of my heart is the cause of every pang that at this moment assails it. To render justice where justice is due, I have stripped myself of my last guinea. My integrity shuddered at
[Page 77]
the idea of fraud, and I may with a safe conscience declare, before the God of retribution, that I am a complete bankrupt, in hope as well as fortune.” My soul sympathized in the sorrows of the forlorn stranger, and I listened eagerly to know the sum that would relieve him.
“Alas!” exclaimed he, raising his voice as if to repress a sigh that struggled in his bosom, “my situation is no less singular than unfortunate! I possess a mind too exalted to owe an obligation to an enemy; and at the same time too susceptible to unburden my afflictions to those whose bosoms would ache at the recital. Goaded by adversity, involved in engagements, and menaced by disgrace, I had no hope of avoiding despair, but by flying from the scene of desolation. I am now hastening towards London, there to await the event, which for a time has exiled me from home.”
[Page 78]
“Perhaps you have been driven by vexation to fly, when a more prudent step might have checked the progress of disgrace,” said I. “Were you not rash in quitting your home without the means of life?”
“My honour, my integrity were at stake,” answered he: “I could not stoop so low as to embezzle that property which was due to my creditors.”
“I am only master of a small sum,” said I, “but if you will share it with me, my hand is ready to offer the participation.” He thanked me, and begged that I would candidly declare the extent of my ability to serve him. I knew not how to answer such a question: ashamed to confess myself a poor and wandering fugitive, yet earnest to convince my fellow traveller that, though fortune was my foe, humanity was not an alien to my bosom, I hesitated; my cheek glowed, my heart throbbed in the conflict
[Page 79]
betwixt shame and pity; when he again addressed me.
“A few guineas will pay my expences to London;—a few months may restore me to reputation and society. I would not ask your aid, but that I have left behind me all I could collect amidst the ravages of misfortune. Yes! all! even to the last penny! What can integrity do more?”
The ten pound note, which was above the moiety of my fortune, I presented to the unhappy stranger. “Take this,” said I, “and may the God of mercies inspire your soul with that fortitude which will arm it against the approaches of despair! Now,” continued I, “let me solicit one proof of confidence on your part: let me know your name; not with a wish that you should ever repay the trivial service I have rendered you; but that I may hear, at some future period,
[Page 80]
of your better fortune; and rejoice in your happiness, as I now sympathize in your distress.”
He took a letter from his pocket, and tearing off the superscription, presented it to me. “This was my address,” said he, sighing deeply; “on what speck of this habitable globe I may reside in future, Heaven only knows!” He could not proceed; gratitude filled every vein in his afflicted heart with unutterable sensations; I had not resolution to ask another question, we therefore shook hands, and parted.
[Page 81]
CHAP. XXX. In a short time after I separated from my forlorn companion, I arrived at Bath; where, on entering the first inn, and being ushered into a parlour, I proceeded to examine the paper which the stranger had given me: judge of my consternation, my grief, my surprise, when I read the address of Mr. Randolph, in the hand-writing of the detested Lady Aubrey. The paper was covered with lines on the back of the superscription; and, as soon as astonishment gave me power to unfold it, I read the following words, continuing a subject which had been begun on the other half of the letter:
—“He absconded last night without assigning any reason for his departure: the arrogance of his mind, and the depravity
[Page 82]
of his heart, will render his absence scarcely a matter of regret. Should he attempt to impose on your credulity, or to initiate himself into your favour, I caution you not to trust him. He is unworthy of your esteem; and will only disgrace your friendship, by exemplifying morals, that have at last set reformation at defiance. His sanguinary attempt on the life of Sir Sidney will justify the propriety of this opinion, and authorize me in saying, that he must, henceforth, be an alien to his family. My generous and amiable son has attempted to vindicate Mr. Ainsforth; but my faithful servant, Mrs. Blagden, can bring proofs of his criminal intentions. She heard the report of the pistol, and saw the cowardly assassin making his escape over the park-wall of Glenowen.”
My eyes seemed rivetted on the paper; my whole frame fixed by astonishment,
[Page 83]
as though every nerve had been petrified. My own necessities, and the calumnies of Lady Aubrey, excited sensations which soon subsided; but the regret which I felt on the conviction of Mr. Randolph's ruin, sunk deep into my heart, and overwhelmed it with sorrow. I recollected the scene of opulence in which he had so long exemplified virtues rarely found amidst the splendors of prosperity; and I grieved, that amidst so much surrounding shadow, the star of benevolence, which warmed the bosom of my patron, should be obscured by sorrow and adversity.
As soon as I had recovered from the surprise which Lady Aubrey's letter occasioned, I rushed forth from the inn, and hastened to the bridge which crosses the Avon on entering Bath. There I waited till past midnight, in hopes of seeing the unfortunate friend to whom I owed so many obligations. But my
[Page 84]
wishes were unsuccessful, and I returned to my lodging, vexed, hopeless, and disappointed. The mingling inquietudes that assailed my mind, during the remainder of the night, can better be imagined than described. I would have given half my days to labour and affliction, could I have supported Mr. Randolph by the one, and lightened his bosom's load by participating the other.
Early in the morning I quitted my chamber, and walked towards the environs of the city. I had scarcely proceeded a mile, when I met Colonel Aubrey's chaise: he was alone. The postboy was ordered to stop, and the generous heart greeted me with joy, that was too natural to be the glozing semblance of friendship. He descended from his carriage; the postillion was ordered to follow, and we walked slowly back to the inn. I frankly confessed all that had passed, on the night previous to my
[Page 85]
quitting Glenowen; and firmly resolved never to return thither, during the lifetime of the detestable Lady Aubrey.
My kind and liberal friend endeavoured to soothe my distress, by the most generous assurances of eternal regard and protection. A servant had hired apartments on the South Parade, and Colonel Aubrey, with little persuasion, prevailed on me to remain with him during his residence at Bath.
My spirits were, every hour, more heavily weighed down by despondency, which all the reasoning, and all the attentions of friendship, could not alleviate. Colonel Aubrey frequently mingled in society, but never could induce me to accompany him. Three weeks passed, and no answer arrived from Lady Kencarth; my chagrin augmented by the increasing indisposition of Colonel Aubrey, and I began to consider all the efforts of fortitude as weak and ineffectual.
[Page 86]
I marked the languid eye hourly losing its intelligent lustre; I beheld the manly form withering to debility: yet his mind did not shrink at the approaches of annihilation; and the ravages of corporeal pain, stole no trait of mental power from the object of its persecution. He treated me with the affection of a father: I revered, I loved him, as though I had been his son; my assiduity kept pace with his zeal; I had only to feel a wish, and it was gratified before I could disclose it.
My melancholy humour at last began to throw a gloom over Colonel Aubrey's pursuits; and he refused to accept every invitation, rather than leave me to the indulgence of mournful reveries.
As I found that neither an assumed vivacity, nor repeated persuasions, could induce him to seek for society abroad, while I remained at home, cheerless and desponding, the only step which I would
[Page 87]
take, was that of accompanying him in his fashionable visits. It was a sacrifice of my own feelings, but it was prompted by gratitude; and being conducive to Colonel Aubrey's health as well as amusement, I could no longer hesitate in making it. My friend anticipated a change in the temper of my mind by an intercourse with the world, and an opportunity soon presented itself for trying the experiment: a ball and supper was announced in the Crescent; we were invited, and I promised to attend him.
On entering the room, the blaze of light, the sound of the music, and the beauty of the women fascinated my attention, and I was incapable of advancing a single step beyond the door, when Colonel Aubrey desired me to follow him. I looked like a creature just wakened into life; bewildered, and overpowered by admiration and wonder; when Colonel Aubrey whispered, “Walsingham,
[Page 88]
follow me, and recollect yourself: you must endeavour to evince a knowledge of the forms of the world, and not betray the childish embarrassment of a mere noviciate, unless you mean to be the butt of ridicule for the evening.” I felt the propriety of the lesson, but my feet were still rooted to the ground, and my eyes fixed by the attraction of resistless beauty! Colonel Aubrey took my arm, and led me to the farthest end of the ball-room, where he presented me to the fair priestess who presided in the temple of enchantment. It was Lady Emily Delvin.
Though I had entirely forgot the person of Lady Emily, the adventure at Nice was still perfect in my memory; not only on account of the impression which it made at the time, but because it had frequently been the subject of discourse with Mr. Hanbury, since the period when it happened. I felt disconcerted
[Page 89]
when Colonel Aubrey pronounced the name of Lady Emily, and a foolish pride, which I am almost ashamed to acknowledge, whispered the hope that she had entirely forgot me. It was as I wished: “the little negro Walsingham” had been wholly obliterated from her remembrance; while Mr. Ainsforth, the friend of Colonel Aubrey, was treated with a marked attention, at once flattering to my vanity, and soothing to my afflictions.
Lady Emily, though in her thirty-sixth year, was still handsome and engaging; for, by residing many years on the continent, she had wholly divested herself of that chilling formality, which in England throws a gloom over society, and gives a peculiar aukwardness to the fairest forms that are moulded by the hand of Nature! Her conversation was bewitching, and her manners, though somewhat tinctured with affectation,
[Page 90]
pleased, while they deluded the senses with their ease and vivacity. Though she had not the mild and soul-subduing graces of Isabella, she had something so irresistible in her looks and actions, so lively, so piquante , that I felt wholly unembarrassed, before I had passed many minutes in her society.
Seated on a sofa with the fashioned Lady Emily, at once the object of her attention and curiosity, I entered into familiar conversation on various subjects, and my words flowed with unconstrained ease, when she checked my volubility by asking me if I had ever travelled. I replied, that “in my infancy I had visited the continent.”
“What parts of France or Italy have you seen?” said Lady Emily.
“I never went farther south than Nice,” answered I, somewhat confused by her question.
[Page 91]
“Ainsforth!” said she, pausing:—
“I have some faint recollection of the name. Do you remember ever having met me, while on the continent? Can you call to mind the least circumstance respecting me? I am really solicitous to date our first meeting from some remote period, in order to claim the freedom of an old acquaintance.”
I knew not what to say. Truth, after a short struggle, triumphed over pride, and I answered, that “I remembered her well, at Nice, in the society of Lady Aubrey.”
From this moment all my consequence vanished:—Lady Emily was silent:—her eyes, with a vacant fixture, bespoke her thoughts, wandering back through the mazes of time, and little pleased with the closing perspective. In a few minutes she rose abruptly from her seat, and left me vexed, mortified
[Page 92]
humbled, and more out of spirits than even when I entered the ball-room.
CHAP. XXXI. As I wished to avoid dancing, I strolled to an adjoining apartment, where I found a large circle of both sexes, seated round a table: men intent on the turn of a card, which was destined either to ruin themselves or their intimate associates; and women, sacrificing all the graces of mind and person, wholly absorbed in the vortex of destruction. I cannot describe the disgust which I felt, while I contemplated features, decked with the bloom of youth, yet distorted by internal emotions! Bosoms, which nature formed for the abodes of gentleness and virtue, burning with rage, and panting with
[Page 93]
disappointment! Eyes, darting forth the lightnings of despair; and lips, pallid with the apprehension of impending ruin! Is this, what men call the world? thought I. Are these the votaries of pleasure, the children of luxurious life? Am I to emerge from obscurity for such society;—to obliterate every solid charm that sweetens the cup of existence;—to crush every fair and opening flower for a bitter potion of regret, and a path overrun with weeds that will destroy me? The sombre shade of scholastic labour, now, by comparison with the scene before me, was the sweet retirement of rational delight! The solitudes, the mountain solitudes of Glenowen, were the haunts of meditation, soothing to the heart, and gratifying to the senses. Ah! Rosanna! Why—why did I ever leave them?
Colonel Aubrey having observed my emotions on entering the ball-room, had
[Page 94]
returned to his lodgings early in the evening, without apprizing me of his intentions. I had taken my seat at the supper-table, before I discovered his departure, and it was then too late to relinquish my situation. The board was covered with a profusion of luxuries; the most delicious wines were distributed with prodigality; and the band continued to play the most animated compositions during the repast. Time seemed to fly with more rapidity than usual, and the enchanting circle rose from table before I had leisure to contemplate one half the beauty that surrounded me.
I had, without being conscious of it, drank a much larger portion of wine than was my usual custom; and feeling no inclination to dance, I returned to the faro room. The spirit of mischief there revelled with renovated vigour. Gold flew round, like dust before the whirlwind; and dissipation reared her standard
[Page 95]
over the brow of reason, terribly triumphant. It was the pandemonium of licentiousness; every vice was tolerated, every mind contaminated by the force of pernicious example. On one side sat a venerable sybil, withered by age, and endeavouring to obliterate the memento mori of time, by the gaudy colours of artificial deformity. Poor atom of mortality! thought I; how vain, how horrible are all thy experiments! I was rapt in a profound reverie, when a loud burst of laughter awoke my attention.
It came from an exalted mass of rotundity, whose outward appearance bespoke domestic affliction: a sable habit, which decorated her uncouth figure, was her only mark of regret for the loss of a lovely and amiable child, who, a few days before, had become the tenant of a sepulchre! Seated with her favourite knave, the golden heap before her increased
[Page 96]
or diminished, as fortune either smiled or frowned on her dissipated votary: yet, the chance of a card did not wholly occupy her mind; she was, by turns, the gamester and the coquette; one moment staking hundreds with the insensibility of practised folly, and the next, dressing her coarse and rugged features in all the grotesque affectation of amorous allurement; while time trembled at her temerity, and vice looked more than hideous amidst the furrows of antiquity. I shrunk from so disgusting an object, and turning towards a beautiful girl, whose face had, at supper, attracted my attention, remarked the absurd manners of her opposite neighbour: but my consternation is not to be described when she answered, “To be sure she is a curst comical old devil, and yet there is something so dashing in whatever she does, that one cannot help liking her.”
[Page 97]
“Is she a particular friend of yours?” said I, as soon as I recovered from my electric shock.
“O! I don't claim the honour of her friendship,” replied the young adventurer; “I want nothing from her but her rouleaus : and she is so d---d cunning, there is no touching her, even for a poney 8 .”
“Are you fond of riding?” said I, not comprehending the term she had used at the conclusion of her eloquent speech.
She stared, and after a moment's reflection replied, with a loud laugh, “Where in the name of Heaven were you born? The devil take me, if I don't believe you are some emigrated hermit, who seeing no fun in a woollen shirt and a straw mattrass, left his hovel, and his
[Page 98]
experimental knowledge, for the next tenant. How long have you relinquished wild herbs and spring water? Come with me, and learn to relish better fare, or your character will soon be destroyed in the world of rational refinement.” So saying, she grasped my hand, and hurrying back to the supper-room, filled a large goblet with champaign, which she instantly swallowed, after drinking, “confusion to all anchorets!” The challenge was not to be resisted, and I followed her example, with “perish the heart that is insensible to beauty.”
“Bravo!” exclaimed the airy sylph of dissipation. “Upon my soul, you are already a new being! and I question whether Lady Fubsy won't fall in love with you. She's cursedly fond of you male creatures, and has always some poor devil on her domestic establishment for the support of her reputation.”
[Page 99]
“I should rather think that her reputation would suffer by such an inmate,” said I gravely.
“Come, come, none of your cursed affectation!” replied the laughing monitress. “A woman's character, in our unprejudiced circle, rises in proportion as she augments her catalogue of conquests, till the busy and censorious grow tired of observing her. A female of the haut ton is a celestial orb of universal attraction! and who would be such a curst fool as to talk of spots in the sun?---Here comes a living sample.”
At this moment the Duchess of Riversford sauntered towards us, attended by her daughters and Lord Powderwood. The young ladies threw themselves on a sofa, while the Viscount amused himself with contemplating his own beauties in a large mirror, which was fixed behind it.”
[Page 100]
“I shall leave Bath to-morrow,” cried the polygraphic of Narcissus. “What with the morning's stewing, and the evening's fatigue, a man should have the robust nerves of Hercules to preserve his person in any tolerable degree. My face looks as shrivelled as old Lady Amaranth's.” Here a loud laugh interrupted him. “I wonder,” continued his lordship, “how any disciple of love can venture in these misty regions of sulphur and hot water!—enemies that are ever hostile to beauty and the graces.”
“You never were more mistaken,” cried the rose-lipped duchess. “I come always once a year to Bath in order to repair the ravages of winter—”
“Of Time, you mean,” cried her grace's eldest daughter.
“Hah! comical e'faith!” exclaimed Lord Powderwood, as he placed a small patch on the corner of his upper lip.
[Page 101]
“I'll be crucified if any thing but a woman could have uttered such a savage inuendo!”
“'Tis very true, notwithstanding,” cried Lady Arabella. “My mother will never believe that there is such a traveller as Time, till he overtakes her.”
“Who talks of Time?” vociferated Lady Ethiop. “Here is my friend Lady Parkintown, who is the only person that knows how to kill Time.”
“She drowns him,” said Lord Powderwood gravely. Again a clamourous laugh echoed through the apartment.
“I hate the very name of Time!” cried Lady Ethiop.
“I do not wonder at your antipathy,” interrupted the young lord, “when he hourly presents your ladyship so dark a prospect.”
“Witty devil!” exclaimed the duchess; “it is impossible to be angry
[Page 102]
with the wretch, though he professes to despise us.”
Lady Parkintown and Miss Casino consoled themselves with a bottle of champaign, while Lord Powderwood retouched the rouge on his downy cheek; and the disconsolate duchess sighed an adieu to love, as she threw her fading form on the pillow of repentance.
I now returned to the faro table, and was soon followed by the group of goodnatured friends. I longed to try whether Fortune would smile on me, and thought it would be wise, in the present state of my finances, to conciliate her favour.
The fair Mrs. Winkwell was a looker on; she frequently persuaded me to venture a few stakes, merely as a trial of my temper. “You seem quite a novice at the gaming-table,” said she; “do you never play?”
[Page 103]
“Never.”
“Heavens!” exclaimed the duchess of Riverssord, half-smiling and looking earnestly in my face; “where have you been educated? and how have you avoided so universal a passion?”
“By associating with unfashionable men, and with women who had less exalted propensities,” said I gravely.
“Pretty queer devils!” exclaimed Miss Casino. “What cursed bores such society must present! How could you ever bring your mind to the talk of quitting the delectable creatures?”
I made no reply.
Lady Ethiop persuaded me to hazard a few guineas, merely by way of experiment. Still I resisted, and still her ladyship continued to torment me. “Nothing shall convince me,” said she, “but that you are a very miser, except your instantly taking a seat at the table.”
[Page 104]
“Why will you tempt unguarded innocence to tread the paths of folly?” cried Lady Fubsy, with a tone so provokingly ironical, that I felt the spirit of contradiction stirring within me.
“Perhaps he is forbid to play,” said Lady Amaranth, nodding her flaxen wig over the parterre of folly.
“It must be by his mamma then,” cried Miss Casino; “for he looks too wise to be married!”
“And too sanctified to be gay,” added Lady Parkintown. “He had better come and take another bottle with me.”
“Let the poor fellow alone,” cried Mrs. Casino, “perhaps he has reasons for refusing. It is not every fortune that can bear the chances of a gaming-table.”
“Then he may borrow that of his friend or his mistress,” said Mr. Winkwell. “No man should play that has any thing
[Page 105]
of his own to hazard, except his wife; and she, in the modern school, scarcely belongs to him.”
“Perhaps he thinks it irreligious to gamble on a Sunday morning,” cried Lady Amaranth, with a sneer which would have rivalled Sycorax.
“There is no judging how far vulgar prejudices may influence certain orders of intellect,” said the Duchess of Riversford; “and there are spirits whom Fate has destined to creep through life in perpetual obscurity. Who would endeavour to light the mole, or hope to animate the frozen heart by the admonitions of reason?”
“What card does your grace recommend?” said I, piqued by her raillery.
“The queen of hearts.”
“Your grace is always thinking of yourself,” cried Mr. Winkwell.
“What objection has your grace to the black knave?” said I.
[Page 106]
“That is my favourite,” cried Lady Ethiop.
I took from the packet, which Lady Fubsy had presented me, the knave of clubs.
“I bar personality,” exclaimed an old coxcomb; “let the young adventurer have the queen of diamonds.”
“That's a sort of slanderous inuendo,” said Lady Ethiop; “a sarcastic remark on my friend Mrs. Begum, and I am too much attached to her interest to hear her name mentioned ill-naturedly.”
“To her treasures you mean,” said Miss Casino. “I wish I had some of her diamonds, and she was in the infernal regions.”
“Oh, horrible!” exclaimed Lady Amaranth. “How can you put one in mind of such places?”
“Will nobody name a card for me?” said I.
[Page 107]
“Silence!” vociferated the dealer, looking at me with more insolence than I was disposed to tolerate.
A loud laugh succeeded his abrupt reproof: I was vexed, piqued, and I thought insulted; and taking my purse from my pocket, threw it on the ace of spades. The card lost, and I was a bankrupt!
Mrs. Winkwell lamented my ill-luck, and advised me to try another colour; when Mrs. Casino exclaimed—“For Heaven's sake let him alone!—Fortune does not always favour the brave, and Mr. Ainsforth's courage seems entirely exhausted already. If I had him in my school only one winter, I would teach him to bear ill-luck with a better grace.”
“Yes, and it is all you would teach him!” cried Lady Parkintown. “ I would inculcate more palatable precepts, and, if the doctrines of Diogenes may
[Page 108]
be credited, more efficacious ones.—Your lessons are too dry and fastidious for so young a pupil.”
“Mr. Ainsforth,” interrupted Lady Amaranth, “is not accustomed to mingle in this kind of circle, and perhaps feels himself abashed by its novelty. Age will make a wonderful alteration.”
“I doubt it, my lady,” said I eagerly.
“Can you look in her ladyship's face, and doubt the assertion?” cried Miss Casino in a loud whisper.
Again the titter went round, when Lady Emily interrupted it with “Come, come, you begin to grow scurrilous.—Perhaps Lady Amaranth has not the tame forbearance of Mr. Ainsforth; she may not like to take the load from his shoulders, and become the butt of the company.”
“I do not comprehend your ladyship,” said I, changing colour and disconcerted.
[Page 109]
“Silence!” was again vociferated. I returned the dealer a look of ineffable contempt. Lady Parkintown whispered —“Bravo!”
“You may talk to any one but Lady Emily,” cried little Casino, smothering her evident mirth at the rude admonition I had experienced.
“He had no business to interrupt the table,” said the dealer.
I was a stranger to the forms of fashionable society; and, concluding that I had acted indecorously, was silent.
Lady Amaranth now beckoned me to sit by her, and, my fair hostess being somewhat intimidated by the reproof of the dealer, I was unemployed, and accepted the invitation. “Why will you not play again?” said Lady Amaranth.
“I have no more cash about me.”
“I will be your banker,” cried she, with a tone of languishment perfectly
[Page 110]
ridiculous; “you shall owe me this rouleau” ; at the same time placing fifty guineas on a card before me. I won; the stake was doubled—a second time I was successful; I ventured deeper, still talking to Lady Emily, who leaned over the back of my chair—the advantage again was mine, and again silence was commanded. I smiled, and turning to my lovely hostess, continued the conversation.
Fortune persevered in favouring me till the whole bank was mine. A solemn pause marked the consternation of the circle. I offered to pay Lady Amaranth her fifty guineas; but she said she was in haste; and, requesting that I would call on her the following day, quitted the room precipitately. The bank amounted to eight hundred pounds, and I returned to my lodgings highly pleased with the success of my enterprize.
[Page 111]
CHAP. XXXII. I went to bed—but to sleep was impossible. The idea of having grown into favour with Fortune conjured up a thousand flattering hopes, and I began to anticipate joys which to me have ever been visionary. Now, thought I, if Isabella had not been the victim of Sir Sidney's passions, with this little sum I might have looked forward to the acquirement of a splendid fortune. The recollection of Mr. Randolph's distress succeeded this idea, and I was about to devise means for discovering his retreat, when a servant, abruptly entering my apartment, delivered the following laconic epistle—
“Sir,
“As I know you are offended at my treatment of you last night at Lady
[Page 112]
Emily Delvin's, I expect you to call on me immediately for the satisfaction you merit. Therefore, as I never permit any man to be beforehand with me in a matter of punctilio, or to interfere with me in affairs of gallantry, I shall wait for you from ten till twelve this day on Claverton Down.
“Yours,
“ Linbourne .
“ N. B. I always fight with swords.”
My consternation was infinite. I looked earnestly at the servant who had delivered the letter, and his countenance convinced me that he was no stranger to its contents.
“Are you Lord Linbourne's valet de chambre?” said I.
“Faith and I am his letter-carrier,” replied the honest Hibernian. “This is the fifth of the sort that I have had the honour to deliver during the two
[Page 113]
years that I have lived with him; and the devil a one went so much against the grain as the bit of a challenge which is now before you.”
“Why?” said I, earnestly.
“Because you are the only man who seems inclined to take it seriously. Gentlemen who play, apply the sword as a certain specific where the purse-strings are tardy; and if they won't pull easily, a trifle of a scratch settles the dispute without bloodshed.”
“I do not owe Lord Linbourne a guinea,” said I.
“No matter for that,” cried the valet de chambre ; “you must fight him first, and dispute the business afterwards.”
“Suppose one of us should fall?”
“Why then the debt is paid honourably,” replied O'Donagan; “and upon my conscience there is sympathy between us; for either you will lose a mistress ,
[Page 114]
or your humble servant a master , and that's the same thing, you know.”
“A mistress!—I do not comprehend you.—Pray, my honest fellow, be explicit.”
“Faith and I will, but you must give me time, and I will tell you a long story.”
“Be brief,” said I; “for time is precious.”
“Why then we will defer it till after the battle.”
“Begin, begin,” cried I hastily.—“Whom and what do you mean?”
“Why, for the whom,” replied O'Donagan, “I mean Lady Emily Delvin; and for the what, you must fight my lord before you know any thing at all about it.”
I found that I only lost time in questioning my loquacious messenger, and therefore bade him return to his master with my answer, that I should not fail to
[Page 115]
attend him at the hour and place appointed.
As soon as he was gone I drest myself, and proceeded to Lady Amaranth's— my debt of honour demanded the visit; and as it was the first I had ever incurred, I could not feel easy till I had discharged it. I also made a short memorandum, which I directed to Mr. Hanbury, bequeathing my newly acquired little fortune equally between Isabella and Mr. Randolph. My mind was considerably tranquillized by these proceedings, and I felt wholly indifferent as to the result of my rencontre with Lord Linbourne.
Good frequently originates in evil, and the persecutions of fate bring with them the weariness of an existence which, if perpetually happy, would shrink from annihilation. Thus every mortal pang which this “feverish being” is doomed to suffer, every dear and beloved friend or relative that is prematurely torn
[Page 116]
from our agonized bosoms, smooths the path of death, and only goes before us to divest the grave of more than half its horrors.
With a degree of composure new to a mind hitherto marked by an extraordinary irritability, I walked towards Lady Amaranth's lodgings, ruminating on the approaching event with the philosophy of a stoic; for, having felt the pang of disappointed affection, having found that bosom false in which I had deposited all my hopes of happiness— having experienced the torture which had been given by the cold grasp of persecution, I had no new afflictions to apprehend that could surpass those which I had already experienced. The chords of sensation were unstrung by the repeated touch of sorrow; and I looked forward to death as a pleasing slumber; to the grave as a sure asylum from the miseries of existence.
[Page 117]
Arriving at Lady Amaranth's lodgings, I was ushered into her breakfast room, where, though it was morning, and her ladyship just returned from the bath, I found her as highly rouged , and her flaxen tresses as much curled and powdered, as they had been on the preceding evening. Day light rendered her, if possible, more hideous than she appeared by the tempered glare of an illumined ball-room. I could scarcely believe that I was speaking to a being animated with sensation, till she addressed me with a degree of self-importance that commanded my attention.—
“So, Mr. ---, I really forget your name.”
“Ainsforth,” said I gravely.
“Aye, aye, Mr. Ainsforth; so you last night made your debut in the fashionable world; and how do you like it?”
“Not at all, Lady Amaranth; I am weary of it already,” said I; “and
[Page 118]
most likely in a few hours shall quit it for ever.”
“We are certainly very unlike the order of people with whom you have been accustomed to vegitate,” cried Lady Amaranth, presenting me a cup of chocolate, and endeavouring to look interesting.
“Very unlike, indeed!” said I sighing.
“You are fond of rural life, I presume?” continued her ladyship.
“Solitude was once my pride and my consolation. I found it the source of mental pleasure, till the storms of fate broke over me, and robbed the scene of all its attractions.”
“Rather say the affections of the heart, Mr. Ainsforth.”
I bowed assent, but made no answer.
“If you are fond of rustic sports, I have a small villa, not far from the metropolis, where some excellent hunters
[Page 119]
and a pack of chosen hounds may contribute to your amusement, if you could suffer me to be your companion.”
I was astonished at the proposal, and almost believed that she was suddenly deprived of reason.
“You are silent,” continued she: “Will you accept my invitation? I am weary of the gay world, and pant for retirement; but total solitude would destroy me: I cannot bear to think; rumination preys on my shattered nerves, and overwhelms me with a lassitude which is insupportable.”
I shrunk from the proposal with horror —She read the marked disgust which spoke in every feature, and, after a moment's smothered pride, again renewed the conversation.
“We were in high favour with fortune last night; it was a lucky partnership for us both.”
[Page 120]
“Partnership!” repeated I, with evident amazement.
“Yes; you know we went halves in the stakes which won the bank from Lord Linbourne.”
“I did not understand it so,” said I. “Your ladyship was so kind as to lend me a rouleau , and I am come hither to repay it.”
“If you doubt my word of honour,” cried Lady Amaranth, looking through the window, with a tone of haughty superiority, “here comes a witness who cannot but remember the circumstance.”
As she spoke I observed Mrs. Casino and her pretty, daughter coming round the circus. There was no retreating, and I waited the result of their evidence with silent expectation.
“O you cursed devil!” exclaimed Miss Casino on entering the room, and seeing me with Lady Amaranth: “You ruined poor Linbourne last night, not
[Page 121]
only in fortune, but in love; for Lady Emily and he are parted for ever.”
“Mr. Ainsforth and I are now settling the matter,” cried Lady Amaranth: “he did not understand that we were partners in the stakeswhich won the bank.—Did not you conceive it so?”
“Unquestionably!” replied Mrs. Casino.
“Certainly!” added her pretty daughter.
Lady Fubsy and Mrs. Winkwell now joined the trio, and the weight of the former caused the scale to preponderate in favour of the junto. Though the even hand of justice would have given me the victory.
“I cannot dispute such powerful evidence,” said I, taking out my pocketbook, and presenting her notes to the amount of four hundred and fifty pounds. She received them with unblushing
[Page 122]
avidity, and laying them on the breakfast table, inquired whether I had seen or heard from Lord Linbourne.
I replied that I was then going to meet him.
“You have made a fine fracas !” said Lady Fubsy. “The word Silence , so emphatically repeated, was prompted by more sensations than one; for people do not hesitate to say that Lord Linbourne is the partner of my friend Lady Emily Delvin in other concerns beside her faro bank.”
“Every body knows that her ladyship is near playing her last stake,” cried Mrs. Casino.
“Yes,” continued Lady Amaranth; “even her king of hearts, which has so long been her favourite, has at last deserted her.”
“She is now fond of diamonds,” said Mrs. Casino.
[Page 123]
“Because she has gone through all the clubs till they are weary of her,” cried the good-natured Lady Fubsy.
“And hearts are never prosperous under her ladyship's direction,” added the fair Winkwell.
At this moment Lady Emily entered the room; the whole circle greeted her with smiles of cordiality. My contempt was not to be concealed; and, without speaking another syllable, I quitted the house, shocked and ashamed, as I reflected on the depravity of that sex which was formed to be the brightest ornament of the creation.
The specimen which I had already seen of exalted friendship and modern wit, scarcely left a with in my bosom for a farther intercourse with the fashionable world. The traveller who encounters the highway robber—the libertine who wastes his life and fortune with the avowed wanton, is less exposed to peril
[Page 124]
than the dupe who commits himself to the destructive vortex of a saro table; where beauty is held up as a lure to enthral the senses, while avarice and fraud take advantage of its fascinations, and every moral virtue trembles at its triumphs.
I returned to my lodgings. Colonel Aubrey was still sleeping, having passed a restless night. I took his sword —and, wrapping myself in my surtout the better to conceal it, flew with all possible haste to the place of appointment.
[Page 125]
CHAP. XXXIII. Ascending the hill towards Claverton Down, I met a carriage with the blinds nearly drawn; concluding that Lord Linbourne had waited till his patience was exhausted, and was returning to seek after me, in order to prevent any farther delay, I stopped the postboy. —The blind was raised, when to my infinite surprise, I beheld Sir Sidney Aubrey and Isabella.
I muffled my face in my surtout, and endeavoured to escape: but my cousin had caught a glimpse of my features before I was aware of it, and, instantly leaping from the chaise, caught hold of my arm and detained me. My embarrassment could not be concealed; Isabella's penetrating eyes augmented my chagrin, and I had not power to utter a syllable.
[Page 126]
Sir Sidney demanded to know the cause of my strange appearance; a surtout in the month of August, and one arm wholly concealed, excited his curiosity. He snatched my hand, and shaking it heartily, exclaimed, “By Heavens! my worthy cousin, you are a singular being! What new project do you meditate—an intrigue, or a duel?”
A thousand sensations crowded about my heart: I would joyfully have rushed upon Lord Linbourne's sword, and buried its point in my palpitating bosom: Sir Sidney's easy familiarity was so blended with good-nature, and Isabella's solicitude appeared so like returning attention, that I almost felt inclined to forgive them.
“You must go with us to the inn,” said my cousin.
“Are you travelling alone?” inquired I, dreading to hear a confirmation of my fears.
[Page 127]
Isabella blushed; Sir Sidney smiled; but neither answered my question.
“I am in haste,“ said I, ”you shall see me again in a couple of hours at farthest. I am going to meet a friend upon business which will not detain me long,”
My voice was tremulous, my countenance confused; Isabella looked earnestly at me; “Walsingham,” cried she, “you give us but a cold reception!”
My situation was peculiarly distressing; I thought that the tone of Isabella's voice had something in it more than usually tender; all my former sorrows rushed across my brain; I was agitated, afflicted, vanquished.
“Return with us to the hotel only for five minutes,” repeated Sir Sidney, “and you shall then be at liberty.”
Isabella conjured me, with such impressive kindness, to comply, that I had not power to disobey her. I accompanied
[Page 128]
them to the York-House Hotel, where I wrote the following note to Lord Linbourne:—
“MY LORD,
“Our meeting must be deferred till this evening: I have some business of importance to settle, which will be completed by seven o'clock—at eight you will find me near the first mile-stone on Claverton Down.
“Yours,
“W. A.”
A waiter took the note to Lord Linbourne. He met him on the North Parade, and an immediate answer was returned, written with a pencil on a scrap of paper, merely saying, “I shall expect you.”
I now sent to let Colonel Aubrey know of Sir Sidney's arrival, and in a few minutes he was with us. I avoided
[Page 129]
all kind of conversation with Isabella, but I could not wholly decline seeing her, without an eclaircissement ,which would have involved her in eternal disgrace. What we wish, we are too apt to believe, and I was more than half inclined to credit Sir Sidney's assertion, that Isabella was still innocent. There was a delicate propriety in her words; a beautiful timidity in her looks; a mild and modest dignity in every action, which bore marks of that purity of mind which is not to be awed by the opinions of the world, nor contaminated by the force of pernicious example.
On my first entering the hotel, I had left my great coat and sword in an adjoining apartment. As soon as dinner was finished, Isabella quitted the room, to choose some articles of dress which were brought for her inspection. Colonel Aubrey, availing himself of her absence, began to question Sir Sidney on the
[Page 130]
propriety of their journey. “Does Lady Aubrey know of this excursion?”said he.
“She does, and will shortly follow us,” was the answer.
“Is it your intention to marry Miss Hanbury?” was the second question.
“No,” replied Sir Sidney, gravely. “To debauch her?”
“Certainly not,” answered my cousin.
“You must mean to do the one or the other,” cried Colonel Aubrey, somewhat hastily.
“Neither, upon my honour,” replied Sir Sidney, placing his hand upon his heart, and sighing deeply.
I thought there was an equivocal meaning in his words, which did not strike Colonel Aubrey; for he seemed to insinuate that he could not mean to do that which was previously accomplished.
“Perhaps you are already married?” was the question which followed.
[Page 131]
My cousin smiled. His journey to Bath, alone with Isabella, confirmed the idea; and I considered my situation as hopeless.
“Well,” continued Colonel Aubrey, “I shall be sorry to find that you make a fool of the girl, because she is amiable and lovely—”
“As an angel!” exclaimed I, “and the monster who would pollute so pure a bosom, must have the depravity of a villain.”
“Agreed,” said Sir Sidney.
I felt my breast glow with returning hope. Colonel Aubrey mused, with something so unbelieving in his countenance, that I again felt the trembler fear stealing to my heart;—when he started from his reverie, exclaiming, “By Heavens! she is playing a hazardous game, Sir Sidney; for while you deceive her by specious attentions, she is hourly losing her influence over the affections of Walsingham.”
[Page 132]
My cousin seemed to exult in this intelligence. Colonel Aubrey continued:
“Mr. Ainsforth is the favoured lover of Lady Emily Delvin: I have heard of nothing else in every house that I have entered this morning. His attentions at her ball last night give rise to the report, and I wish him joy with all my soul; for Lady Emily's jointure is two thousand pounds per annum ,with expectancies, at the death of a near relation, which will nearly treble that sum.”
“Ridiculous!” exclaimed Sir Sidney: “Is it true, Walsingham?” continued he seriously.
“This is the first I have heard of it,” answered I. “But even were it true, I cannot allow you, of all men living, the right to question me.”
“Now I can account for your disguise this morning,” cried my cousin: “your confusion at our first meeting, and your hesitation to return with us.
[Page 133]
I thought you were equipped for some important expedition.”
“A very important one indeed!” answered I.
“To meet Lady Emily Delvin? Is she a woman of such fastidious manners that the busy world is not permitted to behold her transactions? Is a disguise absolutely necessary to gain admittance beneath the roof of your enamorata?”
“I do not deny that the business of this morning required more than common secrecy,” said I.
“Already an adept in the mysteries of intrigue! “continued Sir Sidney. “You have made a distinguished debut , and your progress has been rapid!”
“As your thoughts,” said I.
“And changeable,”—cried he—
“As your opinions.”
Sir Sidney seemed piqued at my laconic answers. “I'll see this fair enchantress,” continued he, rising from
[Page 134]
table, and walking hastily about the room. Again he resumed his seat, and filling his glass, inquired, “Pray, my gallant cousin, what is this Lady Emily Delvin?”
“A woman,” answered I.
“Pshaw!” cried he peevishly;” I mean what sort of woman?”
“Handsome, lively, and rich,” replied I, “Young enough to make hearts ache, and too old to be the dupe of her own.”
I was somewhat pleased at the idea of vexing Sir Sidney; and I knew, that to excite his curiosity and not to gratify it, was to render him completely wretched. I had another powerful reason for my ambiguous answers: the hope that Isabella might be roused to that jealousy, which would gratify my self-love, and humble my exulting rival.
“Lady Emily is a divinity!” continued I, with a degree of animation
[Page 135]
which my agitated heart could scarcely assume; “and I am not ashamed to confess my idolatry of such perfection!”
“I have heard my mother talk of her, as a compound of affectation and folly,“ cried Sir Sidney. “At all events I will see her before I sleep, and you shall then know my decided opinion. If she is worthy of notice, I shall take her myself: she will do well enough to trifle away an hour with, when I am not engaged with a more interesting object.”
“Suppose I dispute the prize,” said I sternly.
“O! not with me ,Walsingham! You will not attempt to snatch the laurel from the brow of such a rival; for, since the day of Lady Emily's first entrée in the world of gallantry, she has never had such a lover as Sidney Aubrey.”
“In one respect you are unequalled,” said I; “for, if inordinate vanity can
[Page 136]
claim the right of pre-eminence, your superiority is indisputable.”
My cousin looked serious. I found that I had stung him deeply, and my triumph was gratifying in the extreme.
“Never fear, Walsingham,” cried Colonel Aubrey, “you have yet Miss Hanbury's affections to console you; and she is worth a thousand Lady Emily's. Let Sir Sidney take the titled moppet, while you repose your future hopes on the bosom of unsophisticated beauty.”
Sir Sidney turned pale; he attempted to speak, but could not articulate a syllable. Colonel Aubrey replenished his glass, and a silence of some moments followed. For once, thought I, the victory is mine! Thou art not destined to triumph eternally! Be it now thy turn to feel one pang, for all the agonies that thou hast made me suffer.
[Page 137]
CHAP. XXXIV. The hour drew near in which I was destined to quit Isabella; perhaps, to quit her for ever, at the very moment when returning hope dawned on the dark prospect, which my adverse fate had hitherto presented. I longed to bid her an eternal farewel; to pour out my whole soul in the language of affection; and to avow, that my latest breath should pronounce her the exclusive object of my idolatry. While I was ruminating on the cruelty of my destiny, a small billet was delivered by the waiter. I hastily opened it, and to my infinite consternation read the following lines from Lady Amaranth:
“I have seen Lord Linbourne. He “has hinted suspicions that we won his
[Page 138]
“bank unfairly. I am ready to refund my share of the money, if you have no objection to follow my example; and I will venture to assert, that such a step will not only satisfy his lordship, but put a fortunate period to the whole transaction. He waits at my lodgings for your answer.
“Yours, &c. &c.”
“Infamous collusion! “exclaimed I, rising abruptly from table. I had scarcely uttered the words, when Isabella entered the room with my great coat, and Colonel Aubrey's sword.
“What do you think of this disguise for a knight-errant? “said she, laughing: “this is Walsingham's summer walking dress—!”
“The sword is mine!” said Colonel Aubrey, with evident astonishment.
The matter had gone too far to be concealed any longer. I therefore
[Page 139]
thought it both prudent and candid to inform Colonel Aubrey of my appointment with Lord Linbourne; and also to request that he would be my second.
“Let me investigate the matter,” said he.
“It can only be investigated by the points of our swords,” said I. “The whole of the transaction is marked with infamy;—a plot deeply laid, and impudently put in practice by a set of females, who disgrace the rank they hold in society; who have long deserved the chastisement of the laws, and the detestation of every honourable mind.”
“Such scandalous proceedings merit public exposure,” cried Sir Sidney; “and, though Walsingham will scarcely allow me the name of friend, I will not stand tamely looking on while he is assassinated by a sharper. I will attend you to Claverton Down.”
[Page 140]
“He shall not stir a step,” cried Colonel Aubrey, starting from his seat, and taking his hat;—“I will settle the business without either bloodshed or disgrace to Walsingham. An old soldier is no stranger to the treachery of a dastardly enemy, and if I do not blow up the mine which guards this citadel of iniquity, let me be broke for cowardice, and condemned, for the rest of my life, to associate with scoundrels!”
“Not on my account, for Heaven's sake! “said I. “Let me settle the matter with Lord Linbourne; I do not fear his sword, or doubt the justice of my cause. I cannot refuse to fight him, but with dishonour to myself.”
“In a cause that would enhance your reputation, I would be your second, knee-deep in blood, “cried Colonel Aubrey; “but I will not suffer knaves and gamblers to avail themselves of those
[Page 141]
laws, which were only invented by men of honour, for the defence of virtue.” As he concluded these words, he snatched up his sword, and darted out of the room. I was instantly following, when Sir Sidney and Isabella rushed towards the door, and detained me.
“Walsingham, you stir not,” cried my cousin, turning the key, and putting it in his pocket. Isabella, bursting into tears, conjured me to be calm: “Let Colonel Aubrey arrange the business,” said she; “you are too recently initiated in the follies of fashionable life to know their antidotes. In the hands of a veteran soldier, and a man of invincible courage, your reputation will be safe from every shadow of dishonour.”
“He must not fight Lord Linbourne,” said I.
“Lord Linbourne will not put him to the trial,” cried Sir Sidney; “a duel is not the event which he meditates, believe
[Page 142]
me. Lady Amaranth's note elucidates his motives; and you are the dupe of their practised machinations.”
As he spoke, a gentle tap at the door arrested our attention, and a feeble voice entreated me to open it. Sir Sidney turned as pale as ashes; Isabella looked earnestly at him; he drew the key from his pocket, and, in a moment, Lady Emily Delvin entered the apartment. On seeing that I had companions, she started back, and with a well-feigned timidity made some awkward apologies for her intrusion: yet her ladyship did not retire; her confusion in a moment vanished; she entered the room without the faintest tint of a retiring blush, and throwing herself into a chair, fixed her eyes on Isabella.
“Mr. Ainsforth,” said Lady Emily with affected formality, “I request the honour of speaking to you alone. The business which urges this indecorous
[Page 143]
visit, is of importance that will not admit of a moment's procrastination.”
Sir Sidney bowed and retired; Isabella followed: as soon as the door was shut, Lady Emily rose, and advancing towards me, exclaimed with a smile of reproach, “Are you not a pretty sort of a creature?”
I did not comprehend her question.
“You do not seem sensible of the mischief you have occasioned,” said she, assuming a more serious tone and manner. “The vanity of universal conquest precludes the compunction of individual injury.”
“I am sorry that my conduct towards your ladyship has been so grossly misconstrued,” said I.
“Why sorry?” inquired Lady Emily, evidently mortified. “Is it a matter of disgrace to fix the attentions of a woman, who is not wholly destitute of attractions?”
[Page 144]
I bowed slightly, but made no answer.
Doubly piqued by my coldness, and almost angry at my taciturnity, she continued: “It may be of little consequence to you, but to me it is of infinite importance. The reputation of a woman of rank is too rare a jewel to be trifled with. The affections of the heart deserve a more liberal return than the mere outward attentions of gallantry. Lord Linbourne's jealousy has blazoned my weakness, and it only remains for you, to do me justice.”
I was still mute with consternation:— she proceeded:—
“I must positively quit Bath. This unlucky fracas will overwhelm me with scandal. Lord Linbourne will be glad to avail himself of my indiscreet attentions towards you; and Mrs. Winkwell will triumph over that heart, which she has long sought, in vain, to vanquish.”
[Page 145]
“I thought you called her your friend!—Was she not your guest, Lady Emily?” said I gravely.
“Those are the mere outward semblances of friendship; every woman calls herself my friend, who visits at my house, eats at my table, prys into my secret thoughts, and gives me impertinent admonition,” replied Lady Emily:— “but women of the world are not influenced by such counsellors,—neither are they desirous that we should be; for, to adopt the sober precepts which they affect to inculcate, would be to banish them from our society for ever. But this is not the purpose of my visit:—I came not hither to expose the frivolity of modern friendship, but to try the sincerity of one, who was not schooled in the circles of dissimulation. Are you my friend?”
“Certainly not,” said I abruptly.
[Page 146]
“Why do you disclaim the title?” cried Lady Emily.
“Because I have not known you long enough to judge how far you deserve my good opinion. It would be easier to be your lover than your friend.”
She smiled: her personal vanity was flattered at the expence of her moral virtues, and she did not lament the sacrifice.
“What is your idea of friendship?” said Lady Emily, sighing; “and how is it possible to obtain your good opinion? I confess that I am ambitious of acquiring what you seem determined to withhold, merely to prove that my power is irresistible.”
“Then I will tell you candidly,” said I, “upon condition that you will suffer me immediately to leave you: an affair of consequence demands that I should cease trifling; therefore you must forgive my brevity.”
[Page 147]
The inclination of her head implied obedience.
“Friendship,” said I, “is one of the purest passions of the human mind! It braves the perils of adversity, and knows no delight equal to that of proving its sincerity. It confesses no superiority of rank; it will not bear inequality of fortune.”
“What are its visible traits ?” interrupted Lady Emily; “for, by its secret sensations, I shall never learn to know it.”
“So much the worse!” said I. “The outward marks of friendship are easily described. It courts us not in the sunny hours of pleasure and prosperity, but, when the storms of fate gather round the child of sorrow, rushes forward to its aid, participates in every grief, and throws the gifts of fortune into the lap of the desponding mourner. It comes not to console affliction dressed
[Page 148]
in the plausible, but insulting tears of pity; it does not paint the anguish of regret in frothy sounds or vaunted commiseration —its actions are its vouchers, not its words; it does not probe the wounded heart, and yet refuse to meliorate its sufferings.”
At this moment Lady Amaranth's carriage stopped at the door. I rushed out of the room, and flew to inquire the cause of her visit.
A presentiment of some new misfortune rushed through my heart, and it did not deceive me. A rencontre had taken place between Colonel Aubrey and Lord Linbourne, which had left the latter dangerously wounded at Lady Amaranth's lodgings.
[Page 149]
CHAP. XXXV. I found Lord Linbourne in the hands of his surgeon, who pronounced the wound to be extremely alarming. Colonel Aubrey's sword had penetrated his right side, and the effusion of blood had totally deprived him of recollection.
In the adjoining apartment the whole phalanx of folly had assembled: I inquired after Colonel Aubrey; they knew nothing about him. O'Donagan was summoned to declare how the rencontre had happened; for he was the only person present, beside the combatants, and he gave the following description:
“My Lord and my Lady Amaranth were settling their partnership in the bank, which the young jontleman got hould on last night at my Lady Delvin's.
[Page 150]
The devil burn the cards! for they are his own tallies,” cried O'Donagan, wiping his eyes. “And so then,” continued he, “in comes the colonel, and, without spaking a word, he axes my lord very genteelly, how he came to be such a knave as to say that the young jontleman had chated him. So then my lady takes herself off, and my lord takes up his bit of steel, which lay very convaniently upon the table. So then---Och! let me recollect— how was it then?---Why, my lord said that Lady Amaranth insisted on having back her money; for that she saw Mrs. Casino making signs to the young jontleman, and it was not fair to play all the game with a friend, d'ye see. Then the colonel called them a pack of chates all together, and my lord drew his sword, and to it they went, like tame tigers, till down comes one, and away marches the other with all the honours of war.”
[Page 151]
“What were you doing all the while?” said I eagerly.
“Looking on, to watch that there was no harm done,” replied O'Donagan; “for I have seen my lord, many a good time, play at fighting in jest; and, as that is the way now-a-days, the devil burn me if I tought that he would ever be in arnest. But this turn he got hould of a tough bit of a Tartar, who was not to be fubbed off with a sham: so he got it;—and that's all I know of the matter.”
“Lady Amaranth and Lord Linbourne joint proprietors of the bank!” said I with astonishment. “What is your opinion of this business?” addressing Mrs. Winkwell.
“I think it shocking and scandalous!” replied she, “though they are my friends; and whatever my public conduct towards them may be, rest assured that I heartily despise their deceptions.
[Page 152]
I know their hearts; they are sordid, trifling, and deceitful: viciously prodigal in pursuit of selfish gratifications, and parsimonious even to meanness, where a fellow-creature depends on their humanity.”
“With such sentiments, why do you make them your associates?” said I; “Are you fond of gaming?”
“O! quite the reverse,” exclaimed Mrs. Winkwell; “I seldom play. But do you imagine that these people open their houses merely for their gambling propensities? Are you yet to learn that they are the most convenient seminaries for every species of dissipation? that, under their roofs, a husband's happiness, and a wife's reputation, are as often staked as the rouleaus on their tables?”
I was preparing to answer, when Lady Ethiop exclaimed, “Well! thank God! Linbourne's exit will be no great loss;
[Page 153]
for he has nearly ruined himself, and would most likely have ended his days a miserable exile!”
“'Tis a good thing for me,” said Mrs. Casino, smiling.
“My mamma owes him five hundred,” added her sprightly epitome; “and death pays all debts of honour, you know.”
I shuddered:---the whole circle laughed.
“Heavens! I hope he will live,” cried Lady Fubsy; “for he borrowed fifty of me only this morning. Indeed he told me it was to lend Lady Emily; but her distress is nothing to me: I'll go and make him give me security on his estate.”
“That has long since been mortgaged,” said Mrs. Casino. “Lord Lambent can give you an account of the business.”
[Page 154]
“ Lady Lambent you mean,” said Lady Ethiop; “though the purity of her flame will not bear the breath of calumny.”
“Nay, Lady Ethiop,” retorted the angry Thais, “you shared one thousand last winter towards your annual purse for the support of your establishment; and it was thought a very fortunate hit, considering the run of ill-luck which had attended your pecuniary labours, and the sudden death of your last éleve.”
“Ridiculous coquet!” muttered Lady Ethiop.
Miss Casino giggled.
“Well, I shall go and dun him,” cried Lady Fubsy.
She was flying, if a tortoise may be supposed to fly, towards the chamber-door, when she was interrupted by the surgeon. “You cannot see his lordship,” said he; “he is incapable of speaking.”
[Page 155]
“But I suppose he can hear !” vociferated her ladyship.
“I trust not,” said little Casino; “for the amiable comments of his kind friends would prevent his ever crediting that sense in future. Poor Linbourne! I believe that I am the only being in the whole circle who will be sorry for his departure.”
“Because you know him the least,” cried Lady Ethiop. “He has had his day, and must make room for more profitable objects. He has lately haunted our faro-table, like the very spectre of his departed prosperity, perpetually reminding one of his folly, and evincing the instability of human happiness: I declare I am always nervous after I have seen him at my bank.”
“You should at least allow him the merit of sympathy,” said Miss Casino; “for I believe his sensations are exactly similar.”
[Page 156]
“It is very fortunate that he is not married,” cried Mr. Winkwell; “that indeed would have been a calamity.”
“You speak like a man of experience,” interrupted Lord Powderwood; “and I make no doubt but you feel what you express; though Mrs. Winkwell will not thank you for the remark.”
“You are a perfect cynic,” exclaimed Miss Casino. “Why do you not marry, and convince yourself how much you are mistaken in your ideas of conjugal felicity?”
“Can I be mistaken with such examples before me?” cried his lordship. “For my own part, I see but one object to whom I feel pleasure in offering my idolatry!”
It was rather unfortunate that a mirror at this moment caught his lordship's attention, and the idol whom he named was but too visible to the disappointed
[Page 157]
circle. After adjusting a love-lock, which nearly covered his right eyebrow, he sighed, “Alas, poor Linbourne! he had none of those soft and polished graces which stamp the finer clay of nobility! He was quite a rude sample of Hibernian ferocity:—but the women like such savages; and to be perfectly comme il faut in the lists of modern gallantry, a man should eat a tiger, or burn a citadel with all the sang froid of a complete Vandal. Guy Earl of Warwick would have been wonderfully sought after by the love-in-spiring phalanx of the present day. He slew a black calf—did he not, Lady Ethiop?”
“I thought it had been a dun cow,” said Miss Casino. “What say you, Lady Fubsy?”
“How should I know?” cried her ladyship, rather angrily.
[Page 158]
“Nay, you must pardon me,” replied Miss Casino; “for your ladyship's figure suggested the idea.”
A burst of laughter echoed through the room.
“Come, come, this is mixing the gall of severity with the light ether of wit,” said Mrs. Winkwell; “though I confess,” said she, addressing me in a low whisper, “that last winter at the opera Lady Fubsy, with her everlasting wreath, always put me in mind of the ancients, who, when they sacrificed a white cow, never failed to dress its brows with a garland of roses.”
As she was speaking, Lord Linbourne groaned deeply; it was like the agonizing sigh of a departing spirit!—I started, and rose abruptly from my seat:—a momentary pause succeeded.
“How awful is this silence!” cried Lady Fubsy, moving majestically towards the looking-glass, and placing
[Page 159]
herself in a dramatic attitude. Miss Casino again began to titter. Lord Powderwood smothered his mirth with a perfumed handkerchief: the pretty Winkwell laughed aloud; and Lady Amaranth, at the same instant entering the drawing-room, made a flaw in her left cheek, which greatly added to the entertainment of the group; yet her ladyship, wholly unconscious of the accident, drawled out with disgusting indifference— “Is Linbourne dead?”
The clatter became general, till the surgeon interfered, and entreated them to recollect, that their friend was at that moment, most probably, expiring in the adjoining apartment.
“Heavens!” exclaimed Lady Amaranth, “he cannot die in my chamber: you must remove him instantly; I would not have a frightful corpse under the roof with me for all the universe. The bare idea makes me ready to faint with
[Page 160]
horror!—I hate the very thoughts of dying: he must be conveyed to his lodgings, and that immediately.”
“Instant death would be the consequence!” replied the surgeon.
“I cannot help that,” said Lady Amaranth. “It is fitter that he should die, than that I should be terrified out of my senses.”
I could bear their unfeeling conduct no longer; but, rushing out of the room abruptly, hastened home in search of Colonel Aubrey.
He had quitted Bath more than an hour, without saying to what part of England he was going. The surgeon's unfavourable report had occasioned his precipitate retreat, and a wish to avoid my acknowledgments induced him to keep his journey a secret. My distress was infinite. The dilemma in which I had involved so kind, so generous a friend; the fatal consequences which
[Page 161]
seemed rapidly approaching, and the precarious state of Colonel Aubrey's health, united to perplex me. I lamented, with undescribable anguish, the moment when I suffered him to interfere, and reproached myself for revealing what had passed respecting Lord Linbourne. But repentance came too tardily when mischief was triumphant; and the torture of my mind was doubly acute, while recollection bade me fear that it was irremediable.
I passed an evening of the most painful solicitude; Lord Linbourne's fever increased every hour, and before midnight he became delirious. This intelligence awoke a thousand new and dreadful apprehensions for the safety of Colonel Aubrey; and I was not so completely benumbed by the torpidity of a fashionable atmosphere as to rest entirely at ease under the conviction of having endangered
[Page 162]
the life of a fellow-creature. I sent several messages to the surgeon who attended Lord Linbourne, for I had no other source of intelligence, the whole phalanx being engaged at Mrs. Casino's ball; the answers were alarming; and my distress almost overwhelmed me.
At midnight I went in search of Isabella and Sir Sidney, who had both received cards from Mrs. Casino: on inquiring at the York Hotel I found that they had accepted the invitation: I shuddered at their conduct, particularly when the waiter added that Lady Emily Delvin had called for them in her carriage. I could scarcely believe the assertion; I had yet to learn the manners and opinions of the new world—for such to me was that race of mortals who, living only for themselves, looked with an eye of apathy on all the breathing world around them.
[Page 163]
I was completely bewildered; how to proceed, or what road to take in search of Colonel Aubrey I knew not. The crisis was momentous; Lord Linbourne was approaching the dark verge of dissolution, “with all his imperfections on his head;” and the dearest friend of my heart, by his death, was menaced with the dreadful alternative of exile or a public trial. I cursed the hour when my evil genius directed my unguarded footsteps to the paths of dissipation.— The whole night passed in inquiries, and before dawn-light, I received intelligence that Lord Linbourne's situation was hopeless. I flew to Sir Sidney's lodgings, from whence I dispatched a short note expressive of my fears, and proposing that we should immediately set out by different roads, in search of Colonel Aubrey. But how shall I describe my consternation, when the servant brought back a verbal message, that Sir
[Page 164]
Sidney had, soon after midnight, quitted Bath with Lady Emily Delvin, and that Miss Hanbury had also departed, but with whom and for what purpose remained a profound secret.
Perplexed, distracted, and weary of the scene before me, I engaged a place in the stage-coach, and early in the morning set out for London. My inclinations knew no choice; my mind, fatigued by perpetual anxiety, seemed wholly enervated: yet I lamented the hour when I strayed from the sequestered vale of life, where the rank weeds of vice and folly are crushed by the sober hand of reason and philanthropy; where honesty is the safeguard of innocence, and man remains the friend of man, because he knows not the refinement of duplicity.
Once more, Rosanna, destined to journey onward through the perilous wilderness of misfortune, I almost tremble
[Page 165]
while I make you my companion. I shall lead you amid dangers; you will meet many assailants, many a weary and persecuted traveller: few will be the flowers that will decorate your path, and those will either be wrested from you by persecution, or withered in the bud by the cold touch of apathy and pride. Yet, pure and gentle associate! we will wander together; the lesson which experience enables me to inculcate will serve as your future safeguard; and the pang which memory inflicts will, from time to time, receive the consolation of sympathy, the graceful sigh of a feeling and unsophisticated bosom.
[Page 166]
CHAP. XXXVI. On my arrival in London, I stopped at an hotel at the west end of the town, where, it being then near midnight, I engaged a small apartment, and, after a short supper, retired to rest. My fortitude was nearly exhausted by excess of rumination; and my mind began to sicken with disgust, while I reflected on the events which had pressed rapidly forward, since my departure from Glenowen. The weight of mortal calamities rarely overpowers the soul, when intervals of hope and consolation allow time for reason to surmount them; but continual sorrow undermines the foundation of every bulwark which human imagination can build; and as the perpetual
[Page 167]
wave diminishes the sandy shore, hourly encroaches, till resistance is vain, and the imperious gulph overwhelms every object that opposes.
A stranger in the vast and busy metropolis, scarcely half initiated in the customs of the world, I seemed as much alone as though I had been placed on the highest of my native mountains. The prospect of society presented no guide to lead me through the perilous maze of life; and the being whose heart experiences no glowing congeniality of sentiment, who knows not the sacred sympathy of friendship, finds an eternal solitude, wherever he is doomed to wander. I had little inclination to explore the arcana of refinement; the manners of the fashionable world were ill-suited to the temper of my mind; and the conduct of my Bath associates only augmented the disgust which was almost inherent to my nature.
[Page 168]
The events of the last month appeared like illusion. Isabella's journey from Glenowen—her attachment to Sir Sidney Aubrey—his repeated and solemn asseverations respecting her innocence— his elopement with the vain and trifling Lady Emily—and Lord Linbourne's precarious situation—absorbed my mind in a gloomy reverie till I was roused by a scuffle in the adjoining chamber. I listened, and heard a warm altercation: the expressions, “Hold him fast”—“He shall not escape”—“Villains, do you mean to murder me?” convinced my mind that some horrible outrage was meditated. I tried the door—it was bolted—I wrenched it open, and, by the glimmering light of a lamp which was burning on the hearth, I perceived a decent looking man, half dressed, forcibly held by two ruffians, who were dragging him along the floor towards a private staircase.
[Page 169]
“For humanity's sake interpose, or these rascals will strangle me,” said the stranger: his voice was scarcely articulate, owing to his having resisted the grasp of his assailants till his strength was exhausted. The fibres of my heart quivered with that emotion which never failed to wring them when I beheld a weaker object in the power of a stronger. To aid the wretch who was sinking beneath the stroke of inhumanity was natural; to resist unmerited persecution, was one of those impulses which nature had from my infancy implanted in my breast. It was the first sensation I had been taught to experience, and will never fail to predominate over every selfish feeling, till the last throb of vitality expires within my bosom.
Without waiting to investigate the origin of this extraordinary outrage, with one blow I laid the most powerful of the two at my feet; his head fell on
[Page 170]
the marble hearth, and he was rendered totally insensible. His cruel but dastardly confederate threw up the sash and loudly called the watch; the object of their persecution escaped, and, in a few moments, I was made a prisoner.
Safely lodged in the watch-house, I now discovered that the stranger whom I had liberated had been arrested for the sum of five thousand pounds, that the bailiff's skull was fractured by his fall, and that there appeared some alarming symptoms, which would require my commitment to the county prison, as soon as I could be taken before a magistrate for that purpose.
I had scarcely been in the den of Erebus five minutes, when a group of watchmen brought in a new prize. Their captive was a young man of fashionable appearance, intoxicated almost to insensibility, with his hair hanging round his
[Page 171]
shoulders, and his face streaming with blood.
“Who have we here?” stammered the constable of the night—“and how comes it that he is in this suspicious pickle? Let me see,” continued the halfdozing scavenger of the law; “do I know his face? Is he an old offender?”
“Sport your glass-blinkers, old grizzle-pate,” cried the inebriated prisoner, “and look steadily while I dazzle your optics with a brace of shiners.”
“Impudent rogue!” exclaimed the man of peace; “if you don't mend your manners you shall be put in the black cellar. I shan't suffer the dignity of the long-robe to be insulted with impunity.”
“Look'ye, old star-gazer,” interrupted the prisoner, “I know a thing or two; you can't humbug me with your canting morality.—I'm up to all your quizzing, my dainty; and if you don't
[Page 172]
let me see day-light before I can count ten, I'll nab your old sconce for you—so here's to begin.”
“Hold him! hold the rascal!” vociferated the man in office; I know him; he's a notorious vagabond—handcuff the saucy varlet.”
“Not till I have winged this bat of antiquity,” cried the young man, at the same moment snatching a staff from his feeble guard, and aiming it at the throne of equity.
“Hold, hold your hand,” said I, seizing his uplifted arm, which was almost powerless owing to his inebriety—
“Would you oppose your strength against age and debility? The contest would make you blush when returning reason enables you to reflect on its inequality.”
“Sir, you're an honest fellow!” stammered the young hero of the night; “and I shall be proud to fight your battles,
[Page 173]
when I have dished the constable; but he must be done over before my honour will be satisfied; for I have long had an inclination to distinguish myself in the field of warfare, and being armed with the law on my side, cannot possibly think of relinquishing the contest.”
“You see,” said I, addressing the venerable circle, “this young man is extremely intoxicated, and wholly unconscious of what he is doing—Let him have his liberty, and depend on his generosity.”
“O d--- me! I take you,” cried the prisoner, pressing his finger on the side of his bleeding nose, and with the other hand presenting them half a score of guineas—“Depend on my generosity, and let me go.”
The constable of the night, making a long neck to examine the bribe, and, putting on his spectacles with most consequential gravity, replied, “Egad! I
[Page 174]
believe I am mistaken! this is not the person I thought it was—why, 'tis my lord! I now recollect his face; we will talk the matter over, and try to settle things amicably; I am for peace and good-fellowship, and hate bloodshed as much as I love justice! What indiscretion has his lordship committed?— some youthful frolic, I dare be sworn.”
“Why, he knocked down a waiter, and threw an old woman out of the window,” cried one of the watchmen.
“Well! and I suppose the waiter was a saucy varlet, and the old woman's time was come—Is there any thing of more consequence against his lordship?”
“Yes, he broke my head with my lantern, and beat in the horn on one side,” cried a second watchman.
“Broke your lantern with your head? well, my lord must buy you a new horn, and all will be right again.”
“It was my head—”
[Page 175]
“Well, your head and your horn— it's all one.—A lord can very well pay for both; nothing more common. Be satisfied, and go your ways: the wisest may be mistaken— I was mistaken.”
“That's no rule,” cried the watchman, still holding up his shattered lantern. “Why, you made young Cinnamon, the grocer, of Shug-lane, pay twenty pound after keeping him two days in Bridewell, only for kicking up a bit of a dust at the weekly hop.”
“Quite a different case—the rogue was an old offender, and a menial subject, fit to make an example of; people of high stations won't do for examples.”
“I don't see why a lord should knock down an honest man, because he is not his equal,” muttered the discontented watchman.
“Lords and honest men are often very different things,” replied the dispenser
[Page 176]
of justice; “therefore I will hear no more grumbling my lord is sensible of his fault, I am satisfied, and that's sufficient.”
“D---n me if I'm sensible of any thing,” cried the young peer: “so touch the gold drops—divide them among you—and I'll send my surgeon to mend the old woman's leg in the morning.”
So saying, the gate was opened, and the valiant champion fallied forth in search of new adventures.
[Page 177]
CHAP. XXXVII. Every thing being once more quiet, I took my seat in an obscure corner, and began to examine the variety of wretchedness around me. Every countenance exhibited marks of guilt or despondency; every tongue uttered either a prayer for liberty, or an execration, which proclaimed the most hardened depravity. Near my feet, on the ground, sat a female, whose features interested me, and whose manner excited my curiosity. She appeared to be about six-and-twenty years of age; her form was beautifully proportioned, but her face was impressed with the lines of premature decay, such as affliction traces, before the hand of Time sets its seal on the fragile works of Nature. I gazed on her with more than ordinary attention; her
[Page 178]
downcast eyes dropped frequent tears upon her bosom; her dishevelled hair half veiled her cheek, where an artificial bloom served to contrast the pale and quivering lip, from which no murmur of complaint proceeded.
In contemplating this daughter of affliction, I almost lost the sense of my own situation. I put forth my hand to raise her; she sighed, and burst into an agony of tears. Every vein in my full heart throbbed while I beheld her. She wore a black domino, and a small hat adorned with rose-coloured feathers: every other part of her dress displayed the gaudy trappings of meretricious allurement. I sighed, when I considered her as one of those ill-fated beings, who become the votaries of vice, before their minds are fortified by the energies of reason.
I inquired the cause of her confinement. She informed me, in broken
[Page 179]
English, that, returning from the masquerade, she had been robbed by one of the guardians of the night, who, on her charging him with the theft, accused her of walking the streets at an unseasonable hour, and delivering her over to one of his comrades, she was brought by force to the place where I found her. There was an artless sorrow in her tone, and a simplicity in her manner, that poured conviction into my heart.
“Is there no possibility of obtaining your release?” said I.
“Two guineas,” answered she, “would purchase my liberty.”
I gave her the paltry sum, and she sprung from the ground to thank me, when a thought occurred, that, by wrapping myself in her domino, I might also escape from captivity. I instantly imparted the idea to my companion, and she rejoiced in the probability of its success. The two guineas were paid
[Page 180]
for her liberation. The Cerberus of the night, being occupied with a group of new visitors, I slipped on my disguise, and passed the threshold without interruption.
As soon as I felt myself once more at liberty, I tied the domino in my handkerchief, and hastened along the pavement with the utmost expedition. The dawn began to break, and the shops to open. The unfortunate female, by whose assistance I escaped, had given me her address; and I repaired to her lodgings in the suburbs of Westminster, to return the domino, and to learn more of her unhappy situation.
I found her in an attic chamber, where poverty spread a deep gloom to the eye of the philanthropist, and indolence, the common associate of vice, exhibited a dreadful compound of wretchedness and disorder. On a chimney-shelf stood a few odd tea-cups; a table, placed in the
[Page 181]
middle of the room, displayed a variety of cosmetics; half a mirror without a frame; an empty bottle which had contained spirits; a summons from the court of conscience; the gaudy hat, which had adorned her head at the masquerade, and a few halfpence, which the watchman had returned after robbing her of four guineas, the whole of her property. These, together with one broken-backed chair, a tattered bed, a washing-tub, and a piece of painted gauze, fringed with tarnished silver, which had once been a robe, but now served for a window-curtain, and which feebly repelled the air that entered at the shattered casement composed the furniture of the miserable chamber.
On opening the door, my footsteps recoiled with an involuntary sensation, which seemed to blend the shuddering of horror with the tenderness of commiseration. I beheld, at one glance,
[Page 182]
the epitome of every human calamity, for, want and depravity, idleness and sorrow, prostitution and death, seemed to spread their destructive spells over every object, and I had scarcely resolution to enter the apartment. Is this the habitation of unprotected woman! thought I. Is this the last asylum of thy credulous victim, ungrateful man? My breast throbbed with compassion, and I gazed around me for several minutes, without the power of uttering a syllable.
The unfortunate tenant of this sky-encircled hell received me with a smile, that faintly struggled with a deep blush which overspread her countenance. It was the ensign of shame, and I blessed the conscious power which still resisted the encroachments of depravity. “Poor child of misery!” said I, “thou art not wholly destitute of feeling; compunction will yet penetrate thy heart; and the
[Page 183]
destroying fiend shall be disappointed of his victim.
I seated myself at the foot of her narrow bed, and looked earnestly at her. She was pale and emaciated. She had divested herself of the flaunting habiliments which had disguised her form, and, wrapped in a long white dressing-gown, looked more interesting than all the tinsel of preposterous fashion could have made her.
A ragged servant girl, who stood labouring at the washing-tub, was her only companion. She was the emblem of poverty; lean, filthy, squallid, and abandoned. Every look, every word proclaimed the little imp an adept in licentiousness; and though scarcely fifteen years had marked her progress towards iniquity, she seemed to vaunt its enormities with the effrontery of a veteran profligate. After dispatching her with a guinea to order breakfast from a neighbouring
[Page 184]
coffee-house, not without some hesitation, I addressed her disconsolate mistress. “Is this scene of wretchedness your chosen retreat?” said I. “Have you no friend, no kindred bosom to shelter you from a barbarous world?” She sighed, and shook her head. I continued:—
“There is something in your look and manner that seems to say, your earlier prospects were less dreary. If you tread, by choice, the mazes of infamy, I can only lament your errors, and pity you: but if your misguided imagination sometimes wanders back to innocence; if your bosom, betrayed by falsehood and polluted by folly, still sighs for the deserted haunts of virtue; my arm is ready to support, and my hand to guide you.”
“Whither can I go?” cried she, sighing. “Society will not receive a fugitive, who has violated every law of
[Page 185]
propriety. I have frequently essayed its paths; I have made many efforts; but in every scene, in every trial of reformation, I have found one enemy.”
“Is it possible?” said I. “Lives there a wretch, who would destroy the buds of renovating virtue, at the moment when they are struggling amidst the poisonous weeds of vice? Whom, and what was your enemy?”
“Woman!” replied the trembling penitent: “that cruel torturer of her own frail sex, whose vaunted and fastidious purity has made more hardened profligates than all the arts and machinations of the destroyer, man.”
“Go on!” said I; “unburden your full heart;—rail, rail against your enemy, and let every agonizing thought lead you back to the abodes of peace.”
“Few women err from innate depravity,” continued she. “We are
[Page 186]
generally the victims of credulity, affection, or that childish vanity which is a part of our existence. But credulity soon awakes from her delusive dream; affection sickens by neglect and insult; and vanity grows weary of her most brilliant atchievements: the wanderer then sighs for the calm delights of reason; and with trembling, timid footsteps re-treads the path which she was tempted to abandon: there she reposes, peaceful and unknown: compunction purifies the bosom, which folly contaminated; and experience places a shield before the heart, which nature formed in the mould of sensibility. Then comes the busy demon—calumny; the story of her indiscretion is buzzed abroad; while the envious and obdurate of her own sex, the cold, the ugly, and the ignorant, unite in a terrific phalanx, by taunts and persecutions to drive her back to ruin.”
[Page 187]
A torrent of tears interrupted her;— and the servant girl at that moment returning with the breakfast, the conversation for a time subsided.
CHAP. XXXVIII. I was glad to find a pause in the story of affliction. The truth, which marked every word she uttered, rendered her an object of the tenderest interest; and convinced me, that had she been less lovely, and more kindly treated by the world, she would have proved an ornament to society. Though robbed of the fragile charm of chastity, she still possessed a mind, enlightened by sorrowful experience, and graced with the most transcendent virtues. I rose and walked slowly round her apartment, wishing to allow her agitated spirits an interval,
[Page 188]
which might give them new powers to repel the tortures of reflection. On the table lay a letter, with the seal broken: I thought I knew the hand-writing on the superscription, and looked earnestly at it for some moments, puzzled by conjecture, and fascinated by curiosity. My companion observed the fixed attention of my countenance, and the object which occasioned it. The attendant imp being ordered to vanish, the conversation was resumed immediately on her departure.
“You are a stranger in this country,” said I, “and I doubly lament your distress, because it casts a stigma not only on the benevolence, but the hospitality of the nation.”
“I cannot allow the charge,” replied the unhappy sufferer, while her cheek became faintly flushed; “I rather think that your country is profusely generous to foreigners, while many worthy and
[Page 189]
enlightened natives are perishing in poverty. Humanity is the characteristic of Britons; but even the noblest acts of liberality lose their claim to applause, when they are indiscriminately exemplified. There is more genuine benevolence in protecting and rewarding one man of genius and virtue, than in oftentatiously supporting a score of vagabonds, whose only claims are a light pair of heels, and a voice which counteracts its harmony by the insolence of ingratitude. And yet, these exotics are cherished in the hot-bed of fashion, while modest merit retires to some solitary nook, and, too proud to court the smiles of undiscerning patrons, expires, silent, unknown, and unlamented.”
“Where hast thou been educated, gentle moralist?” said I,taking her hand, and looking earnestly at her.
She blushed, and sighed with an interesting sadness:—after a short pause of recollection, she replied, “In France.
[Page 190]
My father was highly distinguished for mental perfections, and the education I received was at once my fortune and my destruction. At the death of my parents I was turned adrift on the merciless world: fate threw me into the vortex of dissipation, and I was overwhelmed, before I was aware of the peril that surrounded me.”
She paused to weep; she sobbed like an infant; her poor wan cheek was bathed with tears. I could have taken her to my bosom with the pure affection of a brother. After an agonizing conflict, she continued:—
“It was my destiny at twelve years old to become the protegée of a woman of rank, the most profligate of her sex; then travelling on the continent—”
I started.—“Your name?” said I, eagerly.
“Julie de Beaumont is my real name; that which I am known by is an assumed one.”
[Page 191]
“Merciful God!” exclaimed I. “The beautiful, the innocent Julie! The élève of Lady Emily Delvin!”
“You know me then!” cried she, rising from her seat, and trembling convulsively. “Lives there yet a being who deigns to remember the unfortunate Julie?”
“I did know thee once, unhappy victim!” said I, with agitation that almost suppressed the power of utterance. “I was at Nice with my tutor, when he had a rencontre with Lady Emily's lover, who now lies at the point of death.”
She hid her face in my bosom, and, without making any reply, sunk on the ground before me.
A new scene of anguish now burst upon my imagination. I raised her fainting form, and, seating her beside me, conjured her to compose her mind, and to explain the cause of her affliction.
[Page 192]
After a strong effort of fortitude, she proceeded in the developement of her misfortunes. Lord Linbourne had won her affections, betrayed her confidence, and abandoned her to misery, in a country to whose language she was then a stranger, and amongst a race of women, whose greatest stigma is that want of pity for their sex's failings, which plunges weakness into criminality, and, by the cruelty of contempt, steels the mind against the precepts of reformation.
I remained the whole morning with the ill-fated Julie; and though I found, by her artless story, that she had been the dupe of Lord Linbourne's villany, I plainly discovered that he was still the object of her affections. The idea of his perilous situation (though he had only a few days before refused to lend her a small sum for the support of life, under the pressure of sickness) wrung
[Page 193]
her heart to agony. The letter which lay on the table came from him. I was not mistaken in my conjecture. She sighed when she recapitulated her own sufferings, but she shuddered with horror when she anticipated his annihilation.
Julie de Beaumont was the victim of the gentlest affections; but her mind was too feebly organized to admit of those safeguards, pride and resentment, which seldom fail to counteract the poisons of ingratitude, or to heal the wounds inflicted by duplicity.
Evening advanced before I began to think of my situation. The few hours which I had passed with Julie de Beaumont, had produced a change in her mind that was gratifying to humanity. She had long been beat about by the tempest of affliction, and with joy beheld that pilot who pointed out the harbour where she might repose with safety. I
[Page 194]
encouraged the weary wanderer with hopes of brighter prospects; and after presenting her a small sum for her removal to a more decent habitation, took my leave, with a promise to see her again in the course of a few days.
As the sun began to sink in the horizon, I ventured forth, in search of a lodging for the night. After my rencontre in the hotel, and my escape from the watch-house, I did not think it prudent to visit the West end of the town by day-light. A total stranger in the metropolis, I knew not whither I was going till I found myself in Bondstreet, where, at the window of a shop, I observed a paper on which was written, “Lodgings to let, with board for a single gentleman, in a private family.” I inquired into the particulars, and found that the apartments were to be obtained in a house of considerable
[Page 195]
respectability, and that the motive for taking a boarder was more for the sake of society than for any pecuniary advantage.
I was directed to a street in Mayfair, and with a heavy heart I strolled thither. On my arrival I found the house, though not very large, singularly elegant. I knocked at the door, and was immediately ushered into a dining parlour by a man servant. The mistress of the mansion was obliging and well-bred, and I was delighted with the thought of being admitted as one of her family. After naming the terms, which were extremely reasonable, she requested that I would refer her to some person of my acquaintance who could satisfy such inquiries as she should think proper to make.
“You will forgive me, Sir,” said Mrs. Woodford; “but as I am honoured with the friendship of the first people in
[Page 196]
the kingdom. I am under the necessity of being particularly cautious whom I admit beneath my roof, and into the society of my connections. Of course, you know many who will settle this little point of form; and a reference to any one person of fashion will be sufficient.”
I was somewhat at a loss how to arrange this matter of etiquette, without discovering my situation. The danger to which my rash conduct had exposed me, rendered it absolutely necessary that, for a short time, I should change my name, and conceal my family connections. Taken by surprise, I knew not what to say, but with some hesitation answered, that I knew Lady Ethiop, Lord Linbourne, the Duchess of Riversford, and many others of equal rank and consequence in the circles of distinction.
[Page 197]
Mrs. Woodford smiled: “I am perfectly satisfied,” said she; “and, without any further inquiry, shall be delighted to have you as an inmate of my family. Your good sense will excuse the inquisitive delicacy of my question; for the town is so full of deception, that too much caution cannot be observed in affairs of this nature.”
I bowed, but made no reply; conscious that I had no right to condemn hypocrisy, at the same moment that I meditated to deceive.
I informed Mrs. Woodford, that as I had only arrived in town a short time, I was wholly unsettled in a lodging; that I wished to be accommodated as soon as possible, meaning to devote many of my hours to study and retirement. She replied, that the apartments were ready for my reception, but that she could only let them for one month, a former lodger having engaged them at the
[Page 198]
termination of that period. I agreed to the terms under the name of Montagu, and Mrs. Woodford promised that, before midnight, every thing should be ready for my reception.
CHAP. XXXIX. I strolled towards Brompton, deeply rapt in reflection, and almost indifferent with regard to my own destiny, till the close of twilight, when, after taking some slight refreshment, with slow and lingering steps I returned to my new lodgings. A thousand ideas crowded on my mind during my evening walk; and every moment as I ruminated on the events of the past week, I became more and more careless of an existence which seemed to promise nothing but
[Page 199]
disappointment. The falsehood and folly of the world does more towards forming a perfect philosopher than all the pedantry of scholastic knowledge obtained in the cell of an anchoret, or the gloom of a cloister. Man may ruminate in the still sequestered scenes of life; but extensive knowledge and proportionate disgust for the mazy miseries of this sublunary sphere, can only be acquired and justly founded on an extensive intercourse with society. The citizen of the world is the only true philosopher: he examines without prejudice; he judges from experience.
My ruminations did not end till I knocked at the door of my new habitation. Mrs. Woodford was a widow of small fortune; but, having a daughter whom she wished to render more independent than herself, and being fond of society, she generally let a part of her house during the winter months to
[Page 200]
persons of respectability. She was a woman of a very amiable disposition, singularly good-natured, and sufficiently dim-sighted to overlook the frailties of her friends; while, by the dignity of every virtue in her own person, she set an example worthy of imitation.
Mrs. Woodford was what is commonly called a woman of the world; too highly born and too well educated to rank with the middling class of society; and yet, being neither rich nor titled, condemned to go through all the drudgery of attending to the caprices of those who condescended to countenance and protect her. She was obliged to make regular and daily visits at the doors of her fashionable friends; and, when admitted, to bring either a new selection of anecdotes, or a fresh tale of mystery, to banish the ennui of a morning conversation. She was the ready chaperone of every miss of the haut ton ; the chere
[Page 201]
amie of every illustrious undecided female character in the circles of dissipation; respectable as an associate, and convenient as a companion; very obliging, very well bred, and very content, though very much degraded.
Mrs. Woodford's deceased husband had been eminently distinguished at the bar, and was reckoned one of the most eloquent pleaders of his time; but, like his accomplished help-mate, he doated on good company, associated with nobles, emulated the splendours of high life, and evinced his lofty spirit by adopting the follies of the ostentatious; till his expensive domestic establishment, luxurious table, and elegant equipages, absorbed the profits of his profession; insomuch that when he died only five thousand pounds, and an annuity of four hundred, Mrs. Woodford's marriage-settlement, remained for the future support of his wife and daughter.
[Page 202]
The widow was lively, sensible, and buxom; the daughter lovely, gentle, and accomplished; she had been educated in a convent at Lisle, and was, for the second winter, the admiration of the fashionable circles. Mrs. Woodford anticipated all the splendors of dignified parade; she considered her charming Amelia as the future wonder of the courtly sphere! Nothing less than the coronet of a duchess already encircled her brows with visionary ermine, while her dreams of future greatness filled every present moment with unutterable rapture. Miss Woodford was considerably patronized in the world of splendid deception; for, by the relations of her deceased father, some of whom were placed in the upper ranks of fortune, she, on her return to England, had been presented to what is usually termed the very best society.
[Page 203]
Mrs. Woodford's love of nobility was inordinate; for to her eyes, the tinsel of a coronet had irresistible charms, whatever the head might be which chance had ordained it to decorate; she, by an unaccountable infatuation, discovered graces, even where the robe of nobility overshadowed the vilest distortions of nature; and the regular gradations from folly to criminality bore in her opinion the stamp of guilt, in proportion as the offender took precedence in the etiquette of a drawing-room. She was a perpetual title-hunter; a student of the most indefatigable order in the emblazoned pages of ancient and modern heraldry; not a lion couchant nor a griffin rampant, but was her familiar acquaintance; her paths of literary delight, a field sable; and the proudest ascent of her ambitious travels, a chevron towering amidst the gaudy glow of variegated deformity.
[Page 204]
She could boast the friendship of more right-honourable dishonourables than a first minister of state, or a newly imported French courtesan. The bare idea of visiting my lady, or being attended by my lord, was to her the most enviable of human enjoyments. The richly-emblazoned chariot of a duchess loitering at her door during a morning visit, and exciting the envy of the vulgar, exhilarated her spirits almost to ecstasy; and a nod of condescension from a prince of the blood-royal never failed to agitate her brain with the fever of delirium. Yet, there was much to commend, even amidst the weakness that degraded her: she was friendly, mild-tempered, charitable, and sincere; the last of these inestimable qualifications exposed her to a thousand dilemmas, and frequently hazarded her popularity in those societies in which she was perpetually duped and delighted.
[Page 205]
Mrs. Woodford, however, did not wholly confine her pursuits to the general tenor of fashionable propensities;— she knew that there were such things as mental acquirements; and her secondary wish was somewhat more laudable, though not less ambitious, than her first. It was a desire to obtain the good opinion of the present generation, and to have her name handed down with distinction to posterity: with this hope her doors were open to authors and men of talents of every description; and the pride of her right-honourable connections was frequently humbled by a tacit comparison between the adventitious gifts of fortune and the illustrious pre-eminence of native genius. Yet Mrs. Woodford persevered in courting the wife as well as the lofty, because she knew that, in this enlightened æra, the pen is a weapon which mocks the vaunted lance of ancient chivalry; for while it lashes vice
[Page 206]
and makes folly tremble, it gives to fame and virtue that wreath which will bloom to immortality.
In her early days Mrs. Woodford had felt an ungovernable inclination to wear the laurels of Parnassus. Her husband, being an excellent classical scholar, and profusely gifted with a torrent of eloquence, which perpetually excited the glow of emulation in her gentle bosom, she, by his constant persuasion, and that of her good-natured friends, who hoped to witness the downfal of her ambition, at length resolved to brave the shafts of criticism; and to appear before the awful tribunal of the public, as a candidate for literary honours. Intimately acquainted with several reviewers, both male and female, she hoped, at least, to stand acquitted, if not favoured with the distinctions of their august assembly!— But woeful was her disappointment! The honeyed cup of flattery, which had
[Page 207]
been presented to her in the private circles of hospitality, was dashed with the bitter gall of envy, when publicly demanded in the high court of, what is called, literary justice.
The sacred veneration with which she had been accustomed to behold the dispensers of the laurel wreath rendered her meekly submissive, whenever they thought fit to give their private opinions of her early productions. An enigma, a jeu d'esprit , a charade, or a sentimental fragment, frequently found its way into the different magazines with a considerable share of approbation—they were the mere ephemera of their day; and though they buzzed in the dressing-room of a fashionable miss, and displayed their graces at the toilettes of venerable coquettes, they gave no cause for alarm in the broad circle of literary contention; and, exciting little envy, they of course passed
[Page 208]
uncensured through the ordeal of criticism.
Delighted with the prospect of celebrity which opened to her view, she resolved seriously to invoke the supreme goddess, Fame! and to fall ignobly, or to emulate the loftiest flights of her female contemporaries.
From the moment that she became a formidable rival, the smooth and gentle tide of approbation turned, while the deep gulph of malevolence yawned widely to destroy her. She was not aware of the perils she had to encounter. She knew many classical scholars, many liberal men, from whose knowledge and candour she had to hope for every indulgence; that such men should preside in the tribunal of literary judgment, every adventurer in the paths of fame will readily acknowledge; but there are uses and abuses in every office of authority;
[Page 209]
the defenceless must yield to the all-powerful; and it is too frequently the case that the most polished works suffer the severity of unjustifiable condemnation, merely to gratify the spleen of individuals, who are as far removed from the glowing impulse of genius, as from the pure and gentle sensations of philanthropy.
You will say, From whence does this injustice proceed?—I will briefly answer —Reviewers are but mortals. There are such beings as wives, sisters, and mistresses: there are pretenders to literary honours, who cannot endure the superiority which they envy; who entertain the mean and despicable imp, called Prejudice; and who, being invested with the supreme honours of criticism, wield the pen with as little mercy as the sanguinary savage guides the blow of his death-inflicting tomahawk.
[Page 210]
Let some of our modern dispensers of unlettered wrath, before they condemn a trembling author to shame, and sometimes, to despair, ask their own sapient heads, if they could produce such books as their malice would consign to oblivion. On trials by jury, the man who sits in judgment on a fellow-creature, is bound by sacred engagements to do justice: why then is the existence of that fame which is, to many, dearer than vitality, to await the barbarous caprice of an unknown enemy! Is there no punishment due to the being who wantonly destroys another's hopes, and takes from talents, industry, and truth, the means of obtaining an honourable subsistence? What will draw forth the dawning ray of intellect, but emulation? Can the lustre of mental perfection struggle through gathering clouds, or resist the perpetually freezing blasts of a critical
[Page 211]
atmosphere? Let it be remembered, that true genius is, of all things in nature, the most irritably alive to every attack which menaces a diminution of that fame which is the pride of its existence. Let the candid reader recollect that one mean and dastardly assailant can over-shadow the prospects of a legion , whose mental powers would enlighten the world, and who, if properly taught to resist the petty tyranny, would live in the annals of their country, when their calumniator's name was no longer remembered.
There is another species of danger which has increased, is increasing, and ought to be diminished: the inquisitorial severity of a phalanx, who, being themselves unsuccessful candidates for literary honours, watch, with the untiring industry of that green-eyed monster Jealousy, for an opportunity to depreciate those talents which they never
[Page 212]
can aspire to emulate. These journeymen of Parnassus, after butchering the offspring of a poor helpless scribe, fatten on the wages of their barbarity, and steal the purer particles of other men's brains, while they condemn the mass to complete annihilation. This is not all:— the political tendency of a work is, in these momentous times, of no small importance. Some critics invariably abuse one species of doctrine, while they as uniformly uphold and commend the other; while those who are known to promote their different tenets are certain of protection, though their volumes were the receptacles for stolen goods, furbished up from obsolete romances, blackletter fragments, ingenious forgeries, or the stale Salmagundi of circulating libraries.
Mrs. Woodford's first work of any importance—a Novel in one small volume was—so interspersed with virtuous
[Page 213]
precepts, so embellished with liberal sentiments, so correct in its moral tendency, and so severe upon the profligacy of the rising generation, that few people would notice it; while the circulating libraries condemned it as dull unprofitable stuff, wholly unfit to entertain the majority of their readers. A few inquisitive misses, indeed, exerted themselves so far as to turn over the leaves, and to glean the wormwood of the nauseous lesson; while they scribbled their unlettered rage on the wide waste of margin, and without the smallest touch of sympathetic pity, consigned the timid author to the lash of puerile ridicule. Their ingenuity did not rest here:—they made it their daily task to abuse the arrogant moral-mender, and employed all the docile danglers of the haut ton to ridicule the petticoat pedant, till it was equally the fashion to abuse the work, and to reprobate its author.
[Page 214]
Her second effort (for genius is not to be intimidated by ignorance and folly) was a satirical Poem. Every body longed to see it! day after day the most popular newspapers teemed with advertisements, and expectation was raised on tip-toe, almost to agony. The proud, the glorious morn arose! the timid, trembling candidate for fame looked forward to a prosperous harvest. But, alas! only a few copies were distributed, when the publisher, being menaced with a prosecution, suppressed the sale, and the well hot-pressed pages were coolly condemned to an untimely exit:—nay more, the very person whom it was meant to satirize was permitted to review it; and its dying speech was published, with all the acrimony of puny malice, before the poetical lesson had received the final sentence of the public.
Weary of that triumphant tyranny which deals out injustice where impartiality
[Page 215]
ought to hold the even scale, she now essayed a less hazardous mode of travelling towards Parnassus; an Ode, written on a popular subject, was submitted to the discerning eye of a lady, whose rank alone was sufficient to make the world admire it. The precious morceau was received with great condescension; nay, so very great, that a promise was made to look it over in the course of the ensuing summer, and to recommend it to the whole circle of her acquaintance. The gentle patroness did not break her word: the ode was read; but it was ushered into the beau monde as her own composition, and Mrs. Woodford, having imprudently destroyed the original, was obliged to wink at the poetical larceny, without a hope of retribution, or a possibility of punishing the exalted offender.
Her next production was a Romance of most terrific tendency!—all the horrible
[Page 216]
accompaniments of ghosts, groans, graves, blood-stained hands, daggers, caverns, velvet canopies, and livid lightnings, were displayed in long-drawn cavalcade to frighten school-girls, and to puzzle modern pedants. But the illfated author, having offended a Reviewer by inattention, or want of admiration for what he deemed his superior judgment, her book of terrors! her soul-enchaining pages of supernatural, metaphysical, historical, eventful wonders, was condemned, executed, cut up, hashed, frittered, minced, and disguised, by a jaundiced mind, and a daring hand; while the plot was distorted, and deemed an heterogeneous mass, fit only to feed the gloating eyes of those readers, who skim the pages of criticism to enjoy a fellow author's humiliation, or to scatter abroad the sour cream of envy and malevolence: yet this kind and liberal friend dined at Mrs. Woodford's
[Page 217]
table with the critique in his pocket, and condescended to receive her civilities at the very moment that he ridiculed her hospitality!
The work which followed—for she was not yet dismayed—was a Tragedy, called “Lucretia and Tarquin; or, The Triumphs of Chastity.” The piece was brought forward in the month of June; the story Roman, the dresses Spanish, and the scenery Venetian. Many of the situations were anticipated as too warm for the languid nerves of infant coquettes, while the more experienced mammas declared that they wanted novelty. The modern petit maitre condemned the fable as antediluvian; and the grey-headed libertine positively declined supporting a play, which could only be productive of unpleasing reflections, while it presented an example wholly out of nature. This was not the sum total of objections:—The actors were
[Page 218]
dissatisfied with the distribution of the characters. Every lady insisted on being the heroine, and no gentleman would undertake to be the hero. The manager was weary of the business; and his accomplished deputy, though graced with all the advantages of a fine person and a classical education, having once failed in a similar character, walked over the boards with a degree of sang froid that chilled the whole audience. Added to these perplexing events, the taste of the town was hostile to works of real merit; and though the tragedy had much beauty of thought, with many situations of an interesting nature, it was performed on the first night to a drowsy audience, on the second to empty benches, and on the third was withdrawn, to await a resurrection in a less Gothic form on the groaning shelves of a manager's lumber-room. She printed the tragedy; but a sapient hypercritic
[Page 219]
having the first scene of a play on the same subject, nearly half finished, poor Mrs. Woodford's excellent blank verse was denominated “frothy bombast, a feeble outline, coloured beyond the limits of poetical licence, and fraught with improbabilities that set both nature and reason at defiance!”
Still the indefatigable Spirit of Genius hovered round the fountain of Helicon, and though its expanding wings had been frost-nipped by disappointment, its eye beamed with the lustre of Hope; while the anticipating demon Envy urged her on to a new scene of humiliation.
The next serpent which offered the forbidden laurel to this child of Eve appeared in the airy form of a modern Comedy. But it was nearly fatal in its effects; and, by its unpalatable qualities, threatened to banish her for ever from the Paradise of fashion. This
[Page 220]
sylph of morality, though dressed in all the outward trappings of refined dissipation, was Gothic enough to utter truths which offended the pride of elegant insignificance; it was consequently precondemned as soon as rehearsed, and completely damned before it could offer up a prayer for salvation. A principal actress read her part to a profligate hag of distinction; she, fancying that every line presented a mirror which reflected her own deformity, roused a nest of sympathizing hornets, who, by every shuffling, unjustifiable, and extraordinary trick, (for many of them were adepts in odd tricks and shuffling,) by every violation of public decorum, interrupted its progress, intimidated the performers by anonymous letters, threatened the author with personal danger, talked of pulling the threatre about the ears of the manager, till, by sweeping with the breath of envy and malevolence the wholesome
[Page 221]
wormwood from the stage, they put a period to Mrs. Woodford's literary mania, and added a new wreath of bells to the cap of ignorance and folly.
CHAP. XL. I passed an hour in conversation with my new associate; and before we parted I was acquainted with all her right honourable private anecdotes, from the generous indiscretions of “the glass of fashion,” to the eccentric amours of him whose peccadillo follies are the subject of universal ridicule. She never condescended to mention an untitled acquaintance, and her voice seemed attuned by nature to ring the uninteresting changes of a court calendar. My thoughts nevertheless
[Page 222]
were incessantly wandering to distant objects; and the memory of happier moments embittered every hope of future consolation.
Weary with the day's solicitude, and feverish for want of rest, at length I retired to my chamber; but sleep seemed destined to visit me no more: I ruminated, closed my eyes, slumbered, started, and again quitting my pillow, with my pencil wrote the following stanzas.:
The loathsome toad, whose mis'ry feeds
On noxious dews and baneful weeds,
   Disgusts the startled sight:
Yet when the sultry vapours low'r,
He drinks the poison, from each flow's
   Shook by the wings of night.
Behold the dazzling speckled snake,
Writhing amidst the leafy brake,
   Gilt by the beams of day!
Mark, as the wond'ring victim's eyes
Fix on the beauteous orient dyes,
   The traitor stings his prey.
[Page 223]
Trace but the moral, simply true,
There nature's varying pictures view,
   Whose outward forms deceive;
Where worth in loathsome garb we find,
While pride and vice, with pow'r combin'd,
   In splendid baseness live!
The agonies of reflection increased with every moment, and before daylight I was almost delirious. Again I started from my bed, traversed my chamber, and, by the most incoherent exclamations, alarmed the whole family. Mrs. Woodford's man-servant forced the door, and by persuasive intreaties endeavoured to tranquillize my spirits: but I obstinately refused to re-enter my bed; and, having half-dressed myself, hastily demanded pen, ink, and paper.
They were instantly brought. I wrote many unintelligible lines, and uttered the wildest language of a confirmed maniac. Still I was sensible of every thing around me; and though the paroxysm
[Page 224]
of frenzy became ungovernable, the powers of observation were not wholly annihilated.
My ravings were in a short time interrupted by the arrival of a physician, whom Mrs. Woodford had sent for to my assistance. Doctor Pimpernel entered my chamber with a boisterous tone and a thundering knock, which alarmed me into silence. At first I took him for an officer of justice, but by his pompous, though ever-varying jargon, I soon discovered that he was a disciple of Esculapius. After fixing his eyes on me for several minutes with oppressive inquisitiveness, he exclaimed, “The fellow's mad! by G---d! but I can set him to rights. What is he? Who is he? Whence came he? Where is he going? What are his politics? How do you call him?” Then turning towards Miss Woodford, who was just entering the room, he continued,
[Page 225]
“Beautiful Amelia! how enchanting you look! Well, well: when did you see Lady Ethiop, and your elegant little friend Miss Casino? Divine creature! my whole soul is up in arms whenever I behold her! but she is passing away like a resplendent vision on the edge of the amorous horizon!—Curse the metaphor —it puts me in mind of that destructive composition which has manacled the human race with unforged fetters!—come, give me a pen and some paper; time is precious: ‘the times are out of joint.’ —I have no time for any thing but for gazing on you, beautiful Amelia!”
Here he began to write a prescription, when suddenly throwing down the pen, he continued:
“When did you see your noble cousin, Lord Kencarth? He is a brilliant star, in the dark hemisphere of modern nobility: but the sun of reason is rising rapidly;—it will flame;—it will burn;
[Page 226]
—it will blaze! When was this fellow taken ill? He'll die, by G---d! a fever is scorching him up to cinders: poor devil! is he in love? Cure him, Amelia, cure him.” Again he wrote a word or two, and again renewed the discourse with, “Wonderful news from the continent! I left the old Duchess of Bloomingdell in hysterics. Well, no matter —she has lived long enough: d---n old women—they are only fit to fee physicians, and to propagate false politics.”
“Pray finish the prescription,” cried Miss Woodford; “Mr. Montagu is overwhelmed with fever.” A third time the grey goose's quill was put in motion, the doctor rubbing his forehead, and at the same time gloating on Amelia— “Something to warm the blood, and animate the nervous system—too cold by half—chilled—petrified—freezing, as the loftiest pinnacle of mount Cenis!
[Page 227]
Miraculous! so near the sunshine of such transcendent beauty!”
“You mistake the case,” cried Mrs. Woodford: “Mr. Montagu is in a high fever; he has been nearly delirious the whole night; feel his pulse, and you will be convinced.”
“Be quiet, old woman,” answered the doctor, again rubbing his contracted brow. “The foolish fellow, I tell you, is in love; I know his case—have often felt it—see it at this moment on the tip of his nose—in his right eye—on his forehead;—damme, on the very point of his chin. Well, you must cure him, Amelia: the sublime essence of your odoriferous breath will do the business. Nothing like the balsamic smile of a beautiful woman! More efficacious than all the drugs in Christendom; more skilful than all the bunglers of Warwicklane. The breath of beauty would reanimate the heart of a dying anchoret!
[Page 228]
Nothing like it! I always recommend it in cases of extreme danger; seldom find it fail, where the patient is gifted with the true essence of sublime sensibility. Keep a list ready to fill up my prescriptions; all colours, all sizes, black, white, red, and yellow; French, English, Irish, and Italian: rare drugs; in fine perfection; the divine promoters of universal liberty! Well.”
“What is the doctor talking about?” said Amelia.
“Be quiet, be quiet,” cried Doctor Pimpernel. “Ask no questions, you little hussey, but tell me, when did you see the pretty, plump, dimple chin? Too old, but devilish handsome! 'Tended her last winter in a nervous fever. Mistook the case;—treated it like the dropsy;—was taken in by appearances: —mum for that. Got her through after all. Devilish snug!—Nothing said about it, but what was buzzed by a few
[Page 229]
old women. I like little dimple-chin, because she was fond of my friend Jack Daudlecourt, who presented me to his sister, who introduced me to Lord John Readywit, who recommended me to his grandmother, who hopped off soon after and left him a thumping fortune. One good turn deserves another. Old women ought to die. What say you, beautiful Amelia?”
The attention which I paid to this strange farago of incoherent nonsense produced that calm interval of taciturnity which cooled my brain, and recalled my powers of thinking; when the doctor, rising abruptly, and putting the half-finished prescription into his pocket, continued:—
“Cannot stay—must be at Highgate by nine, on a consultation. Overwhelmed with practice;—dine every day with the first men in the kingdom; —walk arm in arm with nothing but nobles;
[Page 230]
always take the wall, and shove the blockheads into the kennel: a pack of vagabonds all together: no matter for that;—they give sumptuous dinners! Recommend me to the divine creatures. Double profit.—Do a great deal of private business among women of fashion: but none so handsome as you, beautiful Amelia! Well. Now let us see what is to be done.” The doctor again felt my pulse; rubbed his forehead—hemmed —shook his head—and exclaimed, “A pretty business this—up to an hundred and sixty!—Flaming like Vesuvius! Ætna! Caucasus! All your fault, Amelia! Cure him, cure him.” Miss Woodford turned toward the window, with a frown of indignation.
“Do you recommend sleep to Mr. Montagu?” said Mrs. Woodford.
“Sleep!” exclaimed the doctor, again forgetting my situation: “Have not slept all night. Supped at the Earl of
[Page 231]
Thistledown's, with a French Countess. The Earl—never well without me—feel his pulse every day:—don't much like to touch him;—always think of nemo me impune lacessit. Pity the poor little Countess!—Game up on the continent. —Never saw such a divine creature! The Venus de Medicis a drab to her. Only seventeen—rather too old—have been in a fever ever since. Fresh as Hebe! Haughty as Juno! Beautiful as Love! Drinks like Bacchus! Smiles— like the vertical sun-beams, showering gold on the luscious hills of Tuscany! There's a simile! or rather a Semele ! Wish I was her Jupiter. Well; now to business.
“Have you got the morning papers? Generally have those that are worth reading by five o'clock. Dabble a bit in literature myself. Mind you don't blab, Mrs. Woodford: all old
[Page 232]
women love talking;—some pretend to write:—insolent baggages!”
The doctor was trudging off, bludgeon in hand, when Miss Woodford requested to know what I might eat.
“Any thing, nothing,—every thing, no matter what; if you will but shed the lustre of those. divine eyes upon him!” So saying, he thundered down the stairs, leaving me just in the same situation, and burning with fever, as I was when he entered my chamber.
“The doctor is a charming man!” cried Mrs. Woodford, “though he does talk a little wildly; but then, his vivacity is so pleasant, and he is such a favourite amongst people of fashion! Nobody knows the services he has rendered to some of our very first nobility. Lady Amaranth idolizes him! Miss Casino consults him on all occasions: the Duchess of Riversford is never easy
[Page 233]
without him: Miss Amoret declares, that he has been of essential service to her in a very precarious state of health; and the still charming Lady Ethiop finds such a change in her constitution by his assistance, that she declares it is almost as miraculous as washing the Black-a-moor white. Never was there a man so universally beloved by the women!”
“Pardon me, Madam,” interrupted Miss Woodford, “if I beg leave to mention myself as an exception: Doctor Pimpernel is my aversion: his hypocrisy would, alone, teach me to despise him, even if his licentious conversation afforded no plea for my abhorrence. He has often soothed your ear with fulsome praise, one moment; and the very next ridiculed the weakness of our sex, for crediting his duplicity.”
Mrs. Woodford seemed piqued at this unwelcome intelligence, and quitted the
[Page 234]
room abruptly. Amelia followed, and I remained with the servant, who consented to leave me, on condition that I would tranquillize my mind, and endeavour to sleep away its inquietude.
CHAP. XLI. I passed the whole day in my chamber, burning with fever, and wearied with a combination of perplexing ideas. The uncertainty of Lord Linbourne's fate, and the solicitude which I felt to know what was become of my generous friend Colonel Aubrey, by turns agitated my brain: but Isabella hung about my heart, and, in the wide circle of accumulating sorrow, still remained the central object of attraction. Sir Sidney's elopement with Lady Emily, had left her entirely
[Page 235]
unprotected, and I had more than half resolved to revisit Glenowen, in the hope of finding her; when pride contemned the meanness of the experiment, and put an end to the plan, before it was digested by reason. Wrapped in the visionary gloom of melancholy, I poured forth the feelings of my heart in that language which was most congenial to its sorrow:
Teach me, Love, since thy torments no precepts can cure,
   Since reflection and reason deny me relief;
Oh! teach me thy scorn and thy wrongs to endure,
   While the balm of resentment shall solace my grief.
Let my sighs never heave, let my tears never flow,
   Let the smile of contempt the stern victor defy;
For the tear has a charm which no art can bestow,
   And the language of love is the soul-breathing sigh.
Let me shun the proud despot who causes my care,
   Lest the torture I suffer should feed her disdain,
For my tyrant delights in the pang of despair,
   And the sound which she loves is the deep groan of pain.
[Page 236]
I will traverse the desert, climb mountains untrod,
   Where reflection shall sadden with legions of woes;
I will cool my scorch'd brain on the dew-moisten'd sod,
   While around my torn bosom the loud tempest blows,
Yet the mild breath of morning shall bid the storm fly,
   And the sun's glowing wreath shall encircle the steep,
But my bosom shall never forget the deep sigh,
   Nor my eyes lose the vision that prompts them to weep!
Then, O where shall I wander, in search of repose,
   Where explore that oblivion which calms the wrung breast,
Since the lover finds sorrow wherever he goes,
   And the world has, for passion, no pillow of rest?
To the grave! where the tyrant is robb'd of his pow'r,
   Where complainings shall ease, for no anguish is there;
While the breathing destroyer shall live a short hour,
   Till the pang of remorse ends the reign of despair.
I was interrupted by a message from Mrs. Woodford requesting that I would take tea with a select party of her friends, whom she expected in the evening. Little disposed to mingle in society, I at first declined the invitation, but the request was so earnestly repeated by Miss
[Page 237]
Woodford, that I promised, as soon as I could dress myself, to obey their summons.
When I entered the drawing-room, I found that I was too early for the fashionable hour of meeting. It was scarcely eight o'clock, and the only person arrived was Mr. Optic; a character well known in the literary world, and no less distinguished for talents than esteemed for benevolence. He was earnestly employed in writing a prologue for a widow's benefit; and, on my entering the room, did not observe me. Fearful of disturbing his poetical reverie, I stole softly towards the window; and stepping into the balcony, enjoyed the evening breezes but a few minutes, when a female voice solicited charity:
“I am poor and destitute of friends,” cried the forlorn petitioner, “and have here an infant, who is rendered blind by
[Page 238]
the cruel experiments of a German quack-doctor.”
Mr. Optic started from his poetical trance, and putting the prologue in his pocket, rushed into the balcony. The beggar repeated her mournful story, and, being desired to enter the passage, Mr. Optic hastily descended to receive her.
“There he goes!” cried Miss Woodford, “the worthiest of mortals: a man, who, with the shield of gaiety, covers a heart perpetually throbbing for the woes of his fellow-creatures: a man, who, with all the rattling loquacity of a mere mad-cap, is never truly happy, but in performing acts of humanity; who, while he makes fools and knaves his enemies, secures the esteem and admiration of every discerning mind. Let us watch him,” continued Miss Woodford: “but tread softly, I conjure you,
[Page 239]
for his benevolence will not endure the intruding eye of observation.”
We stole to the first landing-place, from whence we contemplated Mr. Optic, with the infant on his knee, exploring those orbs that were for ever veiled in darkness. We observed him wipe away a tear which his eye had dropped on the cheek of the little sufferer; and heard him say, with a sigh that proceeded from the heart,“Alas! poor innocent, thy state is hopeless! All the efforts of mortal knowledge cannot pour one ray of light into those dim and beamless sockets.” He then returned the infant to its mother, gave her his purse, bade her exert all her fortitude to support the pressure of maternal sorrow; and, gently closing the door after her, returned to the drawingroom.
We were now joined by the Duke of Heartwing, who entered the room growling
[Page 240]
at the abuses of the police, in suffering vagrants to crowd the doors of the nobility. “I met,” said he, “a miserable object, half starved, and filthy, who, thrusting a blind brat in my face, nearly made me stumble under the wheels of my carriage. Such sights should be kept from this end of the town, and wholly confined to the obscure regions of St. Giles's. I make it a rule never to encourage idleness, unless the objects are young and pleasing to look on, and then I take care to find them employment.”
“Your grace's discrimination is too well known to require a comment,” said Mr. Optic: “You have always a fair plea for your acts of generosity; and your arms are ever open to the objects of your benevolence.”
“You are severe, Mr. Optic,” cried the duke; “and with half an eye I can discover your meaning: but as you are
[Page 241]
a poet, I must allow your imagination to wander; you deal in fiction.”
“I spoke of your grace's generosity, and benevolence, and so far I plead guilty,” replied Mr. Optic, smiling.
The duke drew his chair into the balcony to contemplate a pretty housemaid at an opposite window, and to avoid Doctor Pimpernel, who was then knocking with vehement impetuosity at the street-door.
After a dozen bows to his grace, and a nod of “How do ye?” to Mr. Optic, the doctor advanced towards me with— “Well, my noble fellow! How are you? You took my prescription? I see you did, you would have been food for worms if you hadn't, by G---d. Well, and how fares it with you? Fever gone—blood temperate—pulses quiet— head cool—hey? Could not come before; was detained by a parcel of medical blockheads—all fools—know nothing
[Page 242]
of physic—Where is the divine Amelia?—Pretty jade—longed to kiss her this morning, but was afraid of offending the old woman. D---n all mothers—only spoil sport—Well!— How often did you take the draughts— saved your life, my noble fellow.— Where's Amelia?”
Here the doctor whispered something to the Duke of Heartwing, and I ventured to edge in a word or two, by informing him, that I had not followed his advice for the best of all possible reasons, because he had never left me a prescription.
“Not written a prescription! hey! how— —when—what—Let me see!— Let me see!—Well!”
“You began one several times, but other objects intervening, the whole was not completed,” said I, gravely.
“I understand you,” replied the doctor; “you are right—right, my noble
[Page 243]
fellow! No minding business when the passions are in rebellion; can never think of physic when Amelia is present. How long have you known her?—Why don't you marry her? Make haste— she is eighteen—three years too old— hate old women!—Got cursedly into fashion! Well! Patience! patience! it cannot last long—the game will soon be up. The broad beams of human reason are expanding in one vast glow from Indus to the pole! Man was created to fly, to outstrip the eagle! for, as my friend Doleful says—
‘The silver moon shall light the hills to dance,
   The golden sun shall drink old ocean dry.
      The sapphire mountains shrink to vallies low,
      The day be black , the midnight welkin glow,
Ere truth and reason shall be hurl'd from France,
   And Liberty in chains a captive lie.’
“Sublime!—Nobody writes like Dole! Every word an epigram! every
[Page 244]
line a little world of philosophy! Mark the point—mark the hurling —mark the lie ! Truth in ev'ry iota! Lofty as Pindar! deep as Aristotle! sarcastic as Junius! Beats Milton, Shakespeare, Virgil, and Horace, all to nothing! Well! do you recollect a famous couplet in Doleful's last popular composition?—
      —‘Turn to France and view,
Five million men in arms, in red and blue :
O! may such godlike spirits ever be
The friends of freedom and of liberty !’
“There's fancy, variety, epithet, pathos, metaphor, allegory, and climax! Never talk of the old school-mistress, the turner of couplets, or the inspired milkwoman— or Laura, or your Annas and Matildas, your Sapphos and Petrarchs— or your Mæviads, and your Bæviads!— Doleful is the very cream of poetry— rich, pure, flowing, sweet!—The fountain of Helicon—the flowery top of Parnassus!
[Page 245]
—Clear as the Thames—various as the Rhine—wild as the Rhone—vast as the Nile—smooth as the Arno—and grand as the Danube! Well! how is your fever?—have you slept?—are your pulses quiet?—is your head cool?—can you eat?—can you drink, my noble fellow? Drink and drive care away. A propos ! —Where is the divine little jade, the beautiful Amelia?”
Mr. Doleful was now ushered in; he approached the circle with a timid bow, and, with a deep sigh, took his seat in a corner of the room.
“Doleful, my boy!” cried the good-humoured Optic; “come, you must read some of your elegiac stanzas; we want something to make us merry.”
“Do, do,” added the doctor; “they always teem with true patriotic fire! fine stuff—better by half than a score of sudorifics! Will sweat the whole universe —clear the head, lighten the body,
[Page 246]
thin the blood, renovate the constitution. Begin, begin—‘the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge!’ Well.”
Mr. Doleful unfolded a small paper, and, with a low tremulous voice, began to read the following
SONNET.
The gauzy rock , while round its purple side
   The shuttle of the morn shall weave sweet flow'rs,
Shall bid its cobweb veil on zephyrs glide,
   While gossomary tears gem ocean's bow'rs.
The plumy poet of the glade shall say,
   Sad are thy plainings to the noon-tide moon ,
And dark and silent is thy ebon day,
   While Nature's songsters join the thrilling tune ;
Soon in the blissful torments of despair,
   Thy freezing woe shall melt the list'ning grove,
And thou the joys of hell with dæmons share,
   And curse the sky-light lamps that lead to love!
Till the Creator blush with shame to see,
How very, very keen, a Lover's pangs may be !
A dead silence followed. Mr. Optic, looking with a sidelong glance at Doleful
[Page 247]
for several minutes, at length gravely asked him, why he did not compose a dictionary of poetical epithets? “The novelty of the thing would make it sell,” said he.
“Ah! novelty is the thing!” exclaimed the duke; “nothing like it.”
Mr. Optic continued—“I do not remember ever having met with sky-light lamps or noon-tide moons in Milton or Young, or even in the obscure pages of Chaucer and Spenser. This is certainly a new æra in poetry, and, with a voluminous glossary, a work upon the subject would stand a chance of puzzling the virtuosi of posterity; at least it would be sure to escape the lash of modern criticism; for the mystery in which it is enveloped, would render the task too laborious for moderate capacities.”
“That is the only reason why I admire the poetry of the present age,” cried the duke: “I detest every thing that the multitude can partake of.”
[Page 248]
“And yet your grace will sometimes quit the flowery eminence of fashion, and rove towards the common,” said Mr. Optic gravely.
“His grace is a voluptuary!” interrupted the doctor: “the blossoms of superlative delight grow beneath his very footsteps!” Then turning to Doleful, he whispered— “Stupid old blockhead! but the game is almost up.”
Doleful bowed a modest assent, and sighed as he rose from his seat to welcome Amelia.
“You are arrived too late, amiable Miss Woodford,” cried the doctor.—
“The English Apollo has been reading one of his exquisite and sublime compositions. Have you nothing more about you?” continued he, addressing the poet— “nothing tender, ludicrous, amatory, patriotic, or familiar?”
“The first he wisely reserves as an emblem of modern reputation,” cried
[Page 249]
Mr. Optic; “the last he considers as your forte ,” addressing the doctor; “the amatory and ludicrous compose the province of his grace; and the patriotic has long been the characteristic of every true Briton.”
“I have lately attempted quite a new thing,” cried Mr. Doleful;— “a poetial sermon.”
Here a loud laugh burst from the whole circle.
“I hope there is a chorus,” cried the duke. “D—me, if you can take orders, Mr. Poet, I'll make you my domestic chaplain.”
“He had better bring it out at the theatre,” said Mr. Optic; “there every poet takes orders; and if religion will not save it from damnation, what will?”
Mr. Doleful sighed deeply.
“Well, my boy,” continued Mr. Optic, “did you ever find a man courageous enough to preach your tuneful
[Page 250]
lesson of morality? or did you mean that it should be sung? Was it enigmatical or theological? I should suppose the former, from the usual tendency of your writings.”
“It was to have been preached by the curate of Ambervale,” replied the poet; “but he, unfortunately, being engaged to dine with the bishop at an early hour, and being ravenously hungry, after a general and pious fast for a continuance of bloodshed, my sermon was cut short in two; and, almost as soon as it saw light, was condemned to die—”
“Without benefit of clergy!” interrupted Mr. Optic; “that was devilish hard indeed! But you may alter it into a pantomime; I dare say it will have equal merit in every situation.”
“I had some idea of turning it into a ballet ,” said Doleful.
[Page 251]
“Why that would be placing it on a good footing with the spectators,” replied Mr. Optic, “and would probably tickle their fancy to some tune. Perhaps it would serve for a finale to Mr. Pang's atheistical doctrines: and it is time that the abominable system of unbelief should be checked, lest every moral virtue should perish by its influence.”
“I have advised Doleful to publish by subscription,” said the doctor.
“A lucky thought,” interrupted Mrs. Woodford; “and I will exert my influence with all my right-honourable friends.”
“Then no doubt he will have a noble list,” said Mr. Optic; “and as talents will be wanting to the work, I will engage to set down the literati.”
“That you do every day,” cried Amelia, laughing.
“Witty rogue!” exclaimed the doctor; “but what cannot beauty do?”
[Page 252]
“Make old men wise,” said Mrs. Woodford.
His grace looked contemptuously.
“Or old women candid,” added the doctor.
The duke half smiled—Mrs. Woodford frowned.
“One would imagine that you were an author, doctor, by your irritability,” said Mr. Optic; “you speak with critical feeling: what ill-starred reviewer has presumed to dash the cup of physic with the gall of severity?”
“I do not understand you,” said the doctor, rubbing his forehead; “and as for the reviewers, by the immortal gods! I set their malice at defiance! My works are beyond their comprehension! There is not a man in the kingdom that knows any thing about the matter besides myself. I am the phœnix of physic! the only Being on the face of the earth who has really dived into the arcanum of
[Page 253]
medicine! I have done more in the experimental way than all the gossips of our fraternity. Did you never read my book upon Barley-water?—Five volumes quarto! with notes medical, critical, botanical, and methodical!—The first work that ever was published!”
“Of the kind,” said Mr. Optic, gravely.
“Of any kind! by the Eternal Powers!” exclaimed the doctor: “I expect that it will run through forty editions. Lady Amaranth declares that it is the sublime preserver of youth! and she has drank nothing but barley-water since my treatise was first published. Those who wish to live long, should live abstemiously. —The divine grain, mixed with the celestial and limpid fluid, will make the bloom of beauty vegitate for ever! Well!”
[Page 254]
“Of course you follow the regimen which you so strenuously recommend,” said Mr. Optic.
“Why,” answered the doctor, rubbing his forehead, “I do not think that starving exactly agrees with my constitution. There are spirits that want subduing, as there are others which ought to be raised.”
“Agreed,” said Mr. Optic; “and both for the benefit of the constitution.”
The doctor hemmed, and scowled at the remark. The duke exclaimed— “Bravo! By G---d, Mr. Optic, you are a man of found understanding, and I honour your opinions. Let the doctor's nostrums thin the breathing race, I recommend that system which will add strength and dignity to the whole circle of humanity!”
“I know nothing about humanity,” said the doctor angrily: “I am for that
[Page 255]
sublime arrangement of things which will purify the body politic, and invigorate the system of universal reformation.”
“Not morally, I hope!” said the duke.
“Only physically,” cried Mr. Optic; “the doctor is too wise to commence a system which the conduct of his whole life has set at defiance.”
The party was now augmented by the arrival of Miss Amoret, and her inseparable friend Mrs. O'Liffy. Mr. Optic took his leave for a short time to visit a neglected author, whom his philanthropy had preserved from perishing. After making a memorandum to get Doleful a long list of subscribers, he bestowed on the trifling circle a sigh of commiseration! A zephyr, which had been contemplating a weeping Cupid on Miss Amoret's fan, caught it as it alighted on the bosom of beauty, lest it should infuse the sting of reflection, and
[Page 256]
thereby destroy the zest of the evening's entertainment.
CHAP. XLII. During supper, a servant ushered in Mr. Gnat, the author and reviewer. At the sound of his name an undescribable sensation seemed to thrill through every bosom. The duke reddened with indignation; the doctor grew pale; Miss Amoret assumed a modest reserve; and Mrs. O'Liffy, for once, softened her voice into the mildness of good breeding. The universal change of looks and manners was astonishing. Mr. Doleful was the only person who paid the critic the smallest attention on his entering the room, and the stilness which followed proved how little his presence was desired by all, excepting Mrs. Woodford—Mr. Doleful's civilities being mere baits to ensuré
[Page 257]
a line of commendation for his next satirical novel.
Mr. Gnat, conscious of his powers to alarm, to irritate, and to sting, whenever he condescended to mingle with unphilosophical society, took his seat with becoming dignity; and, after looking round the circle with a mixture of pity and contempt, selected Mr. Doleful as the only individual worthy of his notice. The doctor made many unsuccessful efforts to attract the critic's eye; but his freezing reserve checked the timid advances, and a silence of several minutes again prevailed. At length, the man of pompous words summoned a quantum sufficit of that powerful stimulus called Resolution, and, with many “hems” and grotesque attitudes, thus addressed the pensive philosopher:
“Sir!—Mr. Gnat:—I have long sought for the honour of cultivating your acquaintance. The very distinguished
[Page 258]
rank which you hold in the resplendent sphere of literature, places you so far above the common race of mortals, that you cannot be astonished when I pronounce you the greatest politician, writer, critic, and philosopher of any past, present, or future century!— The sublimity of your works, the depth of your metaphysical knowledge, the classical refinement of your language, and the prophetic lore which surpasses all human comprehension, has long been felt by the school of true inspiration! and will never cease to illumine the world, till the gorgeous sun goes out like the snuff of a candle.”
Mr. Gnat bowed, and endeavoured to look satisfied.
“Give him a little more,” whispered Doleful; “he can bear it.”
The doctor continued:
“Your works, Mr. Gnat, your grand and unequalled compositions!
[Page 259]
will live—by the immortal gods!—till this eternal orb shall perish!—Your last book was more enlightened than Longinus! more profound than Aristotle!— Rousseau never wrote any thing like the immortal Gnat!”
“ Never !” cried Mr. Optic, at that moment entering the room.
“It is the very quintessence of pure and metaphysical writing!” added the doctor. “The fire of Junius, the fancy of Shakespeare, the reasoning of Locke; every page contains a mine of knowledge!” —Then, turning towards Doleful, the doctor whispered, “What is the title? for I never read it.”
“A Treatise on Things incomprehensible; or, A metaphysical Inquiry into the Manners and political Opinions of unknown Nations,” replied Doleful, in a low voice.
The doctor nodded his thanks.
[Page 260]
“Your incomprehensible treatise, Mr. Gnat,” said he, “your exquisite unknown opinions, will live!—By its sublime and metaphysical powers, it will live longer than any work in the language, except my dissertation on Barley-water!”
Mr. Gnat burst into a loud laugh, which considerably disconcerted the doctor. Miss Woodford, perceiving his chagrin, endeavoured to change the subject. “Have you seen Mr. Cynic's last new comedy?” said she, addressing Mr. Gnat.
“I have not.”
“That is very extraordinary!” cried Mrs. Woodford. “I thought you entertained the highest veneration for his talents?”
“And therefore I do not wish to see his comedy,” said Mr. Gnat. “I should be sorry to change my opinion.”
[Page 261]
“Have you any new works in hand?” said Mr. Doleful.
“Two.”
“Metaphysical or philosophical?”
“Both.”
“The world grows wonderfully enlightened,” exclaimed the doctor. “The sphere of intellectual knowledge expands rapidly! 'Tis such men as Mr. Gnat that are born to settle the equilibrium of the human brain, and to give new nerve to the centre of cogitation! He is, as it were, an inventor of a luminous creation!—a pendulum to the great time-piece of Nature!”
“Have a care, or you will spoil all,” whispered Doleful.
“The world is sufficiently enlightened already,” cried the duke. “Plebeians have no business to think. Too much knowledge will annihilate subordination, and, in time, level all distinctions.”
[Page 262]
Mr. Gnat smiled: the doctor rubbed his forehead; and a pause of some minutes succeeded.
“Though I am an enemy to every step that can produce a total overthrow of proper subordination,” said Mr. Optic, “I am delighted when I contemplate the triumph of talents!—Genius will always find its proper sphere; and though unquiet and discontented spirits will scarcely believe it, every wise and every honest mind will contemn profligacy and idolize talents, even though the former stands on the highest eminence of rank, and the latter moves meekly in the humblest paths of fortune.”
The duke hummed an opera air, and Mrs. Woodford half smiled, while her bosom confessed a divided adoration between mental and personal superiority.
“Well, Mr. Gnat;” cried Miss Woodford, “how did you like Mr.
[Page 263]
Terence's last play? Did you not think it charming?”
“It was very well acted,” replied the critic.
“Did you not discover many good situations?”
“Many—in every part of the theatre,” answered Mr. Gnat.
“I observed several ladies extremely affected,” said Miss Woodford.
“The principal actress in particular,” cried Mr. Gnat; “but she generally is affected.”
“You are more severe than usual,” said Mr. Optic.
The duke smiled.
“We all know that Mr. Optic is the exclusive idolater of Mrs. Siddons,” said Gnat.
“I confess the charge,” interrupted Mr. Optic; “and proudly avow myself the admirer, not only of her unrivalled talents, but of the inestimable virtues of her heart!”
[Page 264]
The just panegyric was acknowledged by the whole circle, one person only excepted.
“She is a fine woman,” said Gnat.
“Let us discuss the subject of Mr. Terence's play,” cried Miss Woodford, addressing Mr. Gnat. “Did you not, in spite of critical severity, feel the effects of the principal scenes?”
“Considerably,” replied Mr. Gnat; “they set me to sleep.”
“Well, I must own,” cried Miss Amoret, “that Mr. Terence's works delight me exceedingly: the women touch my heart with the strongest sensations of sympathy.”
“I dare say,” observed the critic Gnat; “for they are generally forward young ladies.”
Miss Amoret, little pleased with this sarcastic remark, which was something more than an oblique reflection on her mind and manners, turning to her friend Mrs. O'Liffy, exclaimed, “Merciful
[Page 265]
Heaven! what a rude, disagreeable man!—I am sure I have heard the duke say a thousand times that Mr. Terence's heroines were all angels!”
“True,” cried Mr. Gnat; “for they are, in general, ideal beings.”
“Don't you believe that there are such things as angels?” inquired Miss Woodford.
“I cannot doubt it in the present company,” replied the critic.
“I declare,” said Mrs. O'Liffy, “that same Mr. Terence is an enchanting crater; for he makes nothing in writing half a dozen comedies every winter.”
“Unquestionably,” observed Mr. Gnat; “and he is not the only modern author who makes nothing of a comedy.”
“I seldom go to the play but when his pieces are acted,” said Mrs. O'Liffy; “and I could sit to hear them fifty times over all in one, and never fail in every line to discover something new.”
[Page 266]
“It would be fortunate for the author if he could, for once, borrow a little of your discernment,” said Mr. Gnat, with his usual good-nature.
“Did you not laugh at some of the scenes?” cried Miss Amoret.
“Very heartily—particularly at the pathetic ones,” said Gnat.
“He has another ready for rehearsal!” sighed Mr. Doleful.
“A great many, I dare say,” rejoined Mr. Gnat, fidgetting on his chair, and growing tired of every thing.
“I expect that the next will be as good as any of his others,” cried the duke.
“No doubt!” was the laconic answer.
“You are scandalously fastidious and much too splenetic to judge of any author's works,” cried Mrs. Woodford. “Mr. Terence is a man of infinite genius—an able reformer of vitiated taste—a just delineator of modern life—
[Page 267]
a painter of Nature; and, as a judicious, but unprejudiced scholar observes, ‘a mender of hearts!’
“The beautiful Amelia would find him plenty of employment,” cried Doctor Pimpernel; “for if he mends hearts as often as she breaks them, his experience must be unbounded.”
“He might find some opportunities to exercise his art among modern philosophers,” cried Amelia, with an arch smile, which blunted the severity of sarcasm.
“There I cannot agree with you,” said Mr. Optic;” our modern philosophers' hearts are, in general, past mending: they take so much pains to reform others, that they never think of selfreproof till their diseased imagination sets even their own remedy at defiance.”
“Blockheads!—all blockheads!” whispered the doctor, addressing Mr.
[Page 268]
Doleful. “Mere pretenders—political quacks: all froth and foam—nothing like stamina. They will not do when ‘Gods meet gods, and jostle in the dark!’—Shew me a line in Terence's play like that!”
“It would be difficult!” said Mr. Optic, who overheard the doctor's double-dealing.
“And yet Mr. Terence has a very considerable share of classical knowledge,” cried his grace, “considering he was educated in England.”
“That is of little importance,” replied Mr. Gnat. “One page of the new philosophy is worth all the libraries of all the universities.”
“And pray, Sir,” cried the duke, looking earnestly at the metaphysical critic, “what is the new philosophy?”
“It requires a great deal of argument and discussion to explain the system,” said Mr. Gnat, hesitating between
[Page 269]
every word he uttered. “The new philosophy is—” Here he paused. “In short, it is not the old philosophy.”
“Well!—and I guessed as much!” exclaimed Mrs. O'Liffy.
“By Heaven! you are the most enlightened woman upon earth!” said the doctor. “The rara avis of female wits! the honour of your sex, and the glory of Hibernia!” Then, turning to Mr. Doleful, he added in a low voice, “Vulgar baggage!” But I hear she is rich, and a great favourite with people of rank—particularly with the divine creatures!”
Mr. Optic renewed the subject of debate. “Certainly,” said he, “we have some living authors, who, with all the disadvantages of a contracted education, produce works of infinite merit. I am a friend to the effusions of genius, whether they proceed from a milk-woman's dairy, or the stall of a cobler!
[Page 270]
What was Shakespeare? The wild uncultivated child of Nature! unsettered by the shackles of scholastic labour; and, with the wings of inspiration, soaring above every contemporary.”
“I trust you mean in the plebeian circles,” said his grace; “for, if I recollect rightly, he was not noble.”
“He was of Heaven's nobility!” sighed Mr. Doleful. Mr. Gnat smiled. “You poets are always soaring to the regions of fancy,” said he; “but I still maintain, that a writer without a certain portion of metaphysical knowledge can never soar beyond mediocrity. A really wild uncultivated genius is not in the nature of things.”
“But it is a thing of nature, which mocks the drudgery of schools, and makes puny innovators sicken with envy!” said Mrs. Woodford. “Do you think that genius cannot warm the bosom of a plough-boy, or tread the paths
[Page 271]
of same in a pair of black stockings? Shame! shame on such despicable prejudices!”
“These are the vagabonds who presume to keep us in awe!” muttered his grace, with a shrug of discontent.
“Tis a pity that Mrs. Woodford does not write criticisms,” said Mr. Gnat, with a tone of voice so ironical, that it could not be mistaken. Mr. Doleful observed the blush which the sarcasm occasioned, and changed the subject.
“What think you of Charlotte Smith's sonnets?” cried he, addressing Amelia.
“I think them beautifully plaintive, and correctly harmonious,” said Miss Woodford. “Indeed I admire all her works more or less, and some of them to enthusiasm; yet the pleasure experienced by her readers must be greatly diminished, by the reflection that to
[Page 272]
cultivated a mind should feel the pressure of real sorrows, amidst the rich and beautiful effusions of imagination! Do you not commend this authoress?” continued Miss Woodford, addressing Mr. Gnat.
“I never read trifles of that sort,” replied the hypercritic: “we always review poetry from report, none of our society being writers of verse. Indeed we seldom read more than ten pages of any book that is not written by one of our literary association;—and then, the heads of the critique generally come from the author.”
“I am glad to find that he never reads what he reviews: I have some chance of a good word in that case,” said the doctor, in a low tone, addressing Doleful.
“You have written a book then!” said Mr. Optic:— “I never heard of it.”
[Page 273]
“Nor I,” said Mrs. Woodford.
“Nor I,” added Mr. Gnat.
“Nor I,” said Amelia.
“A book!” cried his grace: “damme, doctor, what is it about? Love or physic? Stick to la belle passion , my knight of the pestle; it is more suited to your genius, and will gain you patrons, an hundred to one more than the latter. We all like beauty, but who the devil likes physic?”
“Knight of the pestle! By the immortal gods, this is unlucky!” exclaimed the doctor: then turning to Doleful, he continued: “These titled vagabonds think they dare say any thing; but I know how to be revenged. He shall have my love; and by G---d he shall take my physic!”
“That is a matter of course,” said Mr. Optic.
Miss Amoret giggled; Mrs. O'Liffy looked solemn; Amelia blushed; when
[Page 274]
Doleful, perceiving the doctor's chagrin, and wishing to quiet the irritation which the duke's absurd remark had occasioned, started a new subject for conversation. “How did you like Mrs. Lyric's last production?” said he, addressing Mr. Gnat.
“Why, I think she writes too rapidly,” replied the critic; “and in her last circle of velocity she carried away a blue taper, a rusty lock, a ghost, the wing of a castle, a forest, a moat, a shriek, a chest, and a shadow, from our invaluable collection; while by giving an air of probability to the most striking incidents, she greatly injured the future effect of our laborious mystery.”
“Do you think that an author cannot write rapidly, and at the same time well?” cried Mr. Doleful. “I never allow myself more than five minutes and two seconds, for a poem of four pages.
[Page 275]
I wrote my pantomimical opera in three hours.”
“Just the period of its existence!” said Mr. Optic. “So short a life scarcely deserved damnation!”
Mr. Gnat forgot his natural gravity, and laughed aloud.
“But Mrs. Lyric is so proud, that she disdains our assistance,” said Mr. Gnat. “She scorns to become one of our disciples, and to mingle in the refined system of universal knowledge. We never commend any books which we do not help to write. Mr. Cynic reviewed Mrs. Lyric's last work; he passes sentence on all female offenders.”
“I do not wonder at the number of executions then,” said Mr. Optic; “though I reprobate the malevolence which condemns the opening blossoms of genius. The press teems with dulness; and the universal rage for novel reading is unexampled: yet amidst the
[Page 276]
mass of deformity, I have seen many fair proofs of very distinguished talents: and there certainly are women, whose books present types of good sense, and whose title to applause will flourish amidst the leaves of Parnassus!”
“Indeed!” cried Mrs. O'Liffy, “and I am proud to be one of the number; for I mane to trate the critics with an essay on Platonism; with some little nate remarks, to prove that the brogue is more softer than all the Italian on the other side the Shannon.”
“For what purpose would you undertake so difficult a task?” inquired Mr. Gnat.
“For the instruction of boarding-school misses,” replied Mrs. O'Liffy. “Miss Amores will assist me in the laborious undertaking, and she will also write notes, amatory and explanatory, with couplets in the manner of Ovid; and
[Page 277]
some hints to modern lovers on the mysteries of ancient attachments.”
“To what end?” cried Mr. Gnat, sneeringly.”
“The end of time,” replied Mrs. O'Liffy; “for my lesson will be read when the English language is forgotten: and a pretty bit of stuff it will be, I promise you!”
“Most probably,” said Mr. Gnat, looking at Doleful with something like meaning.
“And Irish stuff is all the fashion,” added Mr. Optic.
“I shall be delighted to disseminate your excellent lessons among the rising generation,” said the doctor. “There can be no doubt, from the specimen which you carry about you, but the brogue is more harmonious than any other accent, ancient or modern. Cannot you contrive to introduce my book on Barley-water? It would be of great
[Page 278]
utility, and is much wanted for the use of schools.”
“Och!” interrupted Mrs. O'Liffy, “mine will be a work of very great weight, upon my conscience
“Pardon me,” said Mr. Gnat, “the weight will be on the conscience of your reviewer.” The kind circle laughed, and Mrs. O'Liffy, for once in her life, was completely disconcerted.
The duke, not being accustomed to literary conversation, after inviting me to his house with great cordiality, moved off.
Doctor Pimpernel, looking at his watch, exclaimed, “Well—must go— want to call at the club to bespeak hands for the new play, ‘Topsy Turvy, or every Slave his own Master,’ written by a particular friend: heard it read; d---d nonsense; very like Shakespeare for all that. Well—you will all come—must support it, because the witty vagabond
[Page 279]
has so many noble connections among the dowagers; d---n dowagers—generally old women. A-propos , one, now lying at the point of death—must look in upon the rich old jade, before she hops off. Come to the play—the right sort— beneficial to the whole race of man! Men should assert their rights—women grow saucy—must be taken down— only invented to amuse the lords of the creation—no business to write. Arrogant husseys! Well!”
“What think you of the poissardes of Paris,” said Mr. Doleful.
“O! grand creatures” replied the doctor; “fine jades! wonderful baggages! A-propos —mind to call on a little French girl, just imported by Mother Lenoir the milliner—mustn't forget it—was desired by the duke:— poor—and stingy—Well! Patience!— cannot last long—thin as a farthing rushlight
[Page 280]
—quite burnt out. The game almost up; for, the world is now whirling on the pivet of reason, and scattering the clouds of superstition to the surrounding chaos of undefinable space. Mind, Doleful, that you immortalize that idea in your next poem. The world—the world—what is the world?”
“A great accident!” sighed Mr. Doleful.
“Let us discuss the point philosophically,” said Mr. Gnat.
“Or physically,” cried the doctor.
“Or poetically,” interrupted Mr. Doleful; for what is it but a grand fiction, an air-born bubble—a balloon— a vast whirligig—a tennis-ball, for the capacious hand of nature?”
“Good! good! sublime! wonderful! great! grand!” exclaimed the doctor; “the very electric gas of human understanding; beats Rousseau—Bolingbroke;
[Page 281]
—beats all imagination: for man was born to dive—to jump—to soar—to fly! to grapple with the stars! to pull the planets from their spheres! Well; you'll come to the play;—don't forget it, beautiful Amelia!”
Here the doctor's exit put a period to the critical, philosophical, physical, poetical discussion; and I returned to my chamber, with my head throbbing, and my pulses beating more violently than ever; and my mind completely disgusted with the system of modern criticism .
[Page 282]
CHAP. XLIII. Fatigued by the perpetual buzz of the evening, I sunk to sleep till near sunrise, when awaking, I quitted my bed, and having hastily dressed myself, descended to the street. The early time of morning afforded me hopes of taking the benefit of the air and exercise without much danger of being seen. The hour was inviting; the Green-Park was sprinkled with a slight shower which had fallen at dawn-light, and I resolved to refresh myself with a walk till breakfast.
I strolled towards the grove which nearly encircles the Ranger's Lodge, and rapt in melancholy musing scarcely knew whither I was going, when I observed a woman's hat lying on the margin of a piece of water which was not
[Page 283]
far distant. I flew to the spot, and perceived a folded paper also, on which was written these words--- ‘ Je mourrai! ce n'est point désespoir; c'est certitude que j'ai épuisé mes maux; que leur terme est arrive! It faut donc que je parte 9 .’
Again I examined the hat, and with painful perturbation recollected that it was the same which had adorned the head of the unhappy Julie. Convinced in my own mind that she had put a period to her miseries, I stood for several minutes overwhelmed with amazement; I felt the blood curdle at my heart, and had not strength to move, nor power to call assistance. The day increased in brightness; the din of business awakened me from the stupor of affliction! every
[Page 284]
thing around me was gay, animated, enchanting! Again I turned to contemplate the still water, and shuddered with new horrors, when I thought on the unfortunate being who could find no other resting-place. The lowing cattle were grazing near my path, the birds were singing on the branches of the overhanging trees; yet the terrors of hell seemed to encompass me, and I even envied the rash Julie her cold and silent pillow. Again I looked wildly round, and, observing two centinels approaching, snatched up the hat, with the written farewel to earthly persecution, and was hastening towards the gate, when they seized me, conducted me to the guard-house, and from thence to a justice of the peace, where, to my infinite astonishment, I was accused of murder.
The witness against me was a servant girl, who swore that she saw me, from a window in Piccadilly, struggling for
[Page 285]
some time with a female, who made violent resistance; that, terrified by the singularity of the scene, she had alarmed the family, and during her absence from the window, the female had disappeared, leaving me alone on the margin of the water; she then apprised the centinels, and I was seized accordingly.
This tale bore such strong marks of plausibility, and I had so little to say in my defence, that I was considered as guilty, before I had time to examine the event. My pockets were searched, and the card with Mademoiselle de Beaumont's assumed address corroborated the accusation beyond a shadow of doubt. I had only one step to take—to be patient till time should elucidate the mystery and confirm my innocence.
The hat was brought into court, and I was questioned to whom it belonged— I replied— “To Mademoiselle de Beaumont.” The centinel had lost the written
[Page 286]
paper; the unhappy Julie had quitted her lodgings, and I began to think my situation perilous in the extreme. Before I had time to devise means for my defence, a new perplexity sprung up to oppose my emancipation—the constable, from whose clutches I had escaped in the watch-house, recognized my person, and I was immediately committed, on an escape-warrant, to a prison in Clerkenwell.
Oh! Rosanna! how did my heart bound with joy! how did my veins throb with satisfaction, when I was informed that the person whom I had rescued from the iron fingers of the law, was my generous, but unfortunate patron, Mr. Randolph.
I did not deny the rescue, but pleaded not guilty of the murder. The spirit of innocence sustained my resolution, and the dread of punishment caused no emotion in my bosom. Though I
[Page 287]
scorned the misery of toiling beneath a patron's despotism; though I would neither hire myself out to countenance vice, nor accept a despicable bribe to wink at enormity, I was not willing to appear wholly unknown. Without soliciting the smallest favour, I wrote a few lines to the Duke of Heartwing: his marked civilities towards me at Mrs. Woodford's, authorized the hope that, in so distressing a dilemma, he would not refuse to acknowledge me. I represented my case, as that of a man who was wrongfully accused of a crime at which humanity shuddered. My messenger, after waiting three hours in the duke's antichamber, brought me back the verbal and laconic answer, that his grace knew no such person.
Having little to hope from exalted benevolence, I was not so much chagrined as may be imagined by this abrupt and indelicate denial. I knew the duke
[Page 288]
to be selfish and ostentatious, and therefore I rather anticipated a refusal than foothed my mind with the idea of protection. I had heard many anecdotes, in which avarice had struggled with pride, and caprice overpowered the pleadings of humanity; but conviction at once decided my opinion, and on my mind marked the generosity of his grace in indelible characters.
I then penned an application to Mr. Gnat: but he, ever on the wing, was no where to be found. I dispatched another letter to Mr. Doleful—his excessive sensibility and enthusiastic love of freedom could not bear to witness my captivity. Doctor Pimpernel was fearful that his being known to visit a person in my predicament, would injure him in his profession: his philanthropy could not support the idea of beholding oppressed innocence: and, though “the broad beams of human reason were expanding
[Page 289]
from Indus to the pole,” I was condemned to linger in a loathsome prison without a single ray to comfort my afflictions. You will wonder at my making no trial of Mr. Optic's humanity; but I had not resolution to obtrude my complaints on that fountain of benevolence which was already divided into a thousand parts, and each devoted to the throbbings of sympathy. It was to those who seldom experienced the touch of sensibility that I applied for protection; I could not press an additional pang on a bosom which felt too forcibly the miseries of the human race to experience many moments of tranquillity.
Stung to the heart by the cold denial of unfeeling minds, I almost began to despair; yet the Muse had never failed to visit me under the pressure of calamity; and though her solace was blended with melancholy, as the last and only
[Page 290]
resource, I thus claimed her consolation:—
Ah! cold Neglect ! more chilling far
   Than Zembla's blast or Scythia's snow!
Sure, born beneath a luckless star
Is he, who, after ev'ry pain
   Has wrung his bosom's central vein,
To fill his bitter cup of woe,
      Is destin'd thee to know!
The smiles of fame, the pride of truth,
   All that can lift the glowing mind,
The noblest energies of youth,
Wit, valour, genius, science, taste!
A form by all that's lovely grac'd,
   A soul where virtue dwells enshrin'd,
      A prey to thee we find!
The spring of life looks fresh and gay,
   The flow'rs of fancy bud around!
We think that ev'ry morn is May;
While hope and rapture fill the breast,
We hold reflection's lore a jest,
   Nor own that sorrow's shaft can wound,
      Till cold Neglect is found.
[Page 291]
Ah! then, how sad the world appears,
   How false, how idle are the gay!
Morn only breaks to witness tears,
And ev'ning closes, but to shew
That darkness mimics human woe,
   And life's best scene a summer day,
      That shines and fades away!
Some dread disease, and others woe,
   Some visionary torments see;
Some shrink unpitied love to know,
Some writhe beneath oppression's fangs,
And some with jealous hopeless pangs:
   But whatsoe'er my fate may be,
      Oh, keep Neglect from me!
E'en, after death, let mem'ry's hand,
   Directed by the moon-light ray,
Weave o'er my grave a cypress band,
And bind the sod with curious care,
And scatter flow'rets fresh and fair,
   And oft the sacred tribute pay,
      To keep Neglect away!
[Page 292]
CHAP. XLIV. On the evening of the same day, I was informed that a lady wished to speak with me; and, on my consenting to see her, Mrs. Woodford entered my apartment. Her astonishment was only to be equalled by her kindness; she offered to bail me, and to find a friend who would join in the surety—she named Mr. Optic as certain to step forward in the cause of humanity; and with disgust informed me that the persons to whom I had written for consolation, though they refused to grant my request, had blazoned my disgrace over one half the metropolis.
Mrs. Woodford's visit cheared my sinking spirits; for sympathy comes sweetly to the soul in the hour of persecution;
[Page 293]
and in proportion as I despised the neglect of base and little minds, I learned how to appreciate the value of her kindness. I wanted no pecuniary aid; but, of this important circumstance the kind philanthropists were wholly ignorant. —Mrs. Woodford offered to lend me any sum that might procure the advantages of a legal defence, and, by repeated assurances of attention, overwhelmed my heart with gratitude that was unbounded.
I passed a weary and melancholy night; I retraced the paths of life which I had trodden, and my tortured memory presented on every side the thorns of persecution. Yet my proud heart would have perished rather than have unburdened its griefs to Lady Aubrey, or have sued for pity from the capricious Isabella.
How different, Rosanna! was my narrow gloomy cell from the wild woods
[Page 294]
and breezy mountains of Glenowen!— Of Glenowen?—I must think of my native haunts no more! I must chase from my wandering imagination every vision of past happiness!
Again every inquiry was made after Julie de Beaumont, but no tidings of her could be obtained in any quarter. Two days passed in dreadful uncertainty, when on the third evening I was consoled by a visit from Amelia. She entered the room trembling and agitated; she could but feebly articulate—“Forgive —excuse this strange, this intruding visit; my motive is to offer you the purest wishes of friendship and esteem— accept them—I conjure you to accept them.”
I knelt, and taking her hand with the tenderest respect, thanked her for her generous conduct—“How?” said I, “oh, tell me how I shall prove my gratitude? —how shall I repay such sweet
[Page 295]
benevolence?” She blushed, and with a look of mild reproof withdrew her hand; I dreaded to offend her, and intreated her to make every allowance for a being almost bewildered by sorrow. A silence of several minutes succeeded; at length; with some hesitation, and an agitated voice, she again addressed me—
“The motive of my visit you will know hereafter; but for the present, I conjure you not to question me. Suffice it that your situation excites a pang which penetrates my heart; I know you —and---”
“You know me, Miss Woodford?” interrupted I, with amazement—“Impossible!”
“Your name is Ainsforth,” said she; “Walsingham Ainsforth—Take comfort to your bosom, and all will yet be well.”
I stood like a statue, petrified by consternation. The turnkey of the prison
[Page 296]
at this moment informed me that all strangers must depart for the night, and Miss Woodford reluctantly took her leave, with a promise to renew her visit on the first opportunity.
Amelia renewed her visit on the following morning, and by the gentlest manners extracted half the poison from the sting of persecution. She passed the whole day with me, and by her conversation rendered existence at least supportable. I conjured her to leave me. —I represented in the strongest language the slander and disgrace which malignity would heap upon her, for her too tender solicitude. She blushed, wept, and attempted to justify her zeal by the eloquent language of benevolence; out confusion interrupted her powers of articulation, and betrayed sensations which my self-love trembled to interpret.
Amelia's marked attentions soothed while they alarmed me. I knew that
[Page 297]
perfection falls not to the lot of man, and I felt that of all men living I had the least right to boast it.
Oh, Rosanna! would Reason but make an effort to counteract human vanity, how many, by flying from the syren Pleasure, would defeat the machinations of that restless demon, who triumphs in destroying.
Miss Woodford was amiable, lovely, and accomplished.—I could have loved her sincerely, tenderly; but the image of Isabella was placed by destiny as a centinel before my heart, forbidding every other object to find access even for a moment. Such is the perverse nature of our sex, that the voice of affection only serves to sicken or to chill our bosoms, while the tyrant who flies, and leaves the arrow of disdain implanted in our hearts, holds an undivided sway, and, by every instance of contempt, adds a new link to the chain which enthrals us.
[Page 298]
Miss Woodford had brought with her several books, in hopes that I might find some amusement during those dreary hours when the horrors of captivity find an alleviation from an intercourse with society. The Minstrel of the inspired Beattie—the interesting and improving lessons of Pratt—the classical works of Murphy—the sweetly soothing effusions of Charlotte Smith—and that fund of humour and character, the Evelina of Miss Burney, formed the collection of her choice. “I bring you,” said she, “the works of living authors; for I am old-fashioned enough to allow praise before the marble of a sepulchre blunts the shafts of envy and detraction.
For oft where high the tree of genius springs,
The pale fiend hovers with her mildew wings,
Shades the rich foliage from the fost'ring ray,
And marks each leaf for premature decay;
[Page 299]
Dims the warm glow that decorates the fruit,
And strikes her lightning glances to the root;
Strips the rent fragments of each latent bloom,
Nor leaves one branch to deck the Poet's tomb.”
We were again interrupted by the hour of shutting the prison. Miss Woodford departed, and I had just opened one of the books which she had brought me, when the turnkey entered my apartment, vociferating---“How fares it vith you, young master? Come, come, leave your books, and endeavour to raise your sperits; von hour's mirth is vorth a month of reading. Don't be faint-hearted, my master—times vill mend; ve grow viser every day; and I have noose to tell you.”
“Good news, I hope,” said I, laying down my book, and listening earnestly.
“Vy, you're found out, that's all,” replied the turnkey; “you're blown; there's no queering the law—ve gentlemen in office arn't to be done over.”
[Page 300]
“Speak intelligibly, for Heaven's sake,” said I; “for I do not comprehend you.”
“Vy, talking is dry vork, young master,” replied the turnkey; “and unprofitable vords are apt to stick in von's throat, as von may say. Ve gentlemen of the law measures our breath by the length of our customer's pocket—good vords arn't to be had for nothing.”
I understood the hint, and desired him to fetch a bottle of his best port.
“Vy, as to vine,” says he, holding his hat suspended over one eye, “ours is but a sort of vish-vash old stuff made of the newest materials, and imported duty free from the neighbourwood of the metropolis. I'm up to their rigg, my young master; I doesn't chuse to drink sloe poison; it does vell enough for some of our wisitors, whose full pockets and empty heads are carculated to patternize new inwensions. If 'twasn't
[Page 301]
for such like, vy your mountebags vou'dnt ride about in their coaches, and fill the churchyards vith customers, and all the vile stare honest men out of countenance.”
“True,” said I; “but you are an observer, I find.”
“'Tis part of my trade, master, to keep a good look out, and every man makes obserwations now-a-days,” said the turnkey. “Then, I examines the noosepapers, and I vatches the vorld as it goes: ah, master! the more von sees, the less von likes: vy ve have a bit of a club here in the wicinity of the prison, and it vou'd make your hair stand an end, vas you but to hear how ve talks politics! Ve gives them a vord of a sort, now and then, I promise you; and ve have some knowing horroters among us that settles things in a giffey.”
“I dare say,” answered I.
“But ve arn't all wagabonds, master; ve have the big and the little; gentlemen of every description, from Dookes and Lords, down to shoeblacks and tinkers; though the lowest don't alvays do the dirtiest vork, master; and ve don't much like to place no great dependance on your high flyers; for they be werry much given to lying; and ve sometimes thinks that they plays a rum game, and vants to be a peg too high for us: but ve are up to their gossip, and vatches them like links; ve makes light of o'em, as von may say;—Lords are but men, master.”
“So I think, my honest friend,” said I.
“And yet,” continued the turnkey,
“ye have some vise heads among us, I promise you; for vit does'nt always belong to great folks, nor visdom to rich vons: ve begins to know a thing or
[Page 303]
two, and to walue our rights and our priweleges, as vell as our betters. But this is dry vork, master.”
“And if you don't take care, may stand a chance to choke you,” said I. “What will you take to wash it down?”
“Vy, a drop of the right sort, if you have no objections, master; vat say you to a pint of brandy?”
“With all my heart,” answered I, “if you will help me to drink it: and as my spirits are counterfeit, I trust that yours will be genuine.
“As pure as gold, and as clear as my eye,” replied the turnkey, darting out of the room, and leaving me to reflect on his political knowledge and purity of dialect. In a few minutes he returned, with a flaming decanter, a large bowl, some sugar, and a small mug of water; and taking the only chair in the
[Page 304]
apartment, he began to mingle the ingredients with more delight than moderation. “Rare stuff, master!” cried the turnkey, swallowing a large glass of brandy, which in colour and taste resembled liquid fire.
“Where do you get your spirits?” said I.
“I smuggles,” replied the turnkey.
“All good things are got by sly vays as times go. Nothing thrives that's fair and above-board; tis as mild as mother's milk, and as clear as amber:— beats all the vine in the uniwerse:—and that's the vay vith all things now-a-days; the strong beats the veak;—vat says you, master?” A second glass of pure liquor washed down the remark.
“I say nothing,” answered I, smiling.
“Vy that's the vay to be on the right side: the less that's said the better, as things goes, master. I do not vant for any
[Page 305]
thing, thank God, and vy should I be vailing and veeping like a sniweller. I have got a trifle of a genteel competency, and keeps the mill going, that helps on, from hand to mouth, as von may say.”
“You are in trade then?” said I.
“No, I aint up to trade:—I han't resolution to be twice ‘Whereas,’ and then to shew my nose above my betters.”
“How then do you profit by your industry?”
“I dabbles.”
“I do not comprehend you,” said I.
“I nabs the bulls, and am down upon the bears, and figures avay in the stocks. I knows a thing or two:—besides, I gets tipped now and then, for vatching the patriots.”
“But do you reconcile that to your conscience?” said I.
[Page 306]
“Vy look'e, master, I only imitates my betters: they vatches, and they takes bribes,” replied the turnkey: “and as for conscience, vy it is only saleable at the general election;—there von gets a good price to be sure; but that don't come often.” A third glass gave a pause to our discourse. “I loves to do things like a gentleman,” cried my companion, gasping for breath. “I knows the importance of my station: I am an officer in his Majesty's service, God bless him! and never forgets vat belongs to my carreter.”
“An officer in his Majesty's service!” repeated I, with some astonishment.
“Yes, I sarves the public, and vatches the people, at the same time; and as his Majesty is the law-maker, vy of course I am in his sarvice, ven I performs my duty.”
[Page 307]
“The people make the laws, my honest friend,” said I. “The legislative body, their representatives, form the glorious pillars that support the throne.”
“Lord love your silly noddle!” cried the turnkey. “This at court, as 'tis in love;—kissing goes by favour. Vy vat should I be, if I cou'dn't palawer a bit, ven I finds a flat that is to be done over? Look at the great house in Vestminster: don't they settle every thing by the gift of the gab!”
“You speak freely,” said I.
“Because I'm a free subject, and loves my king; and vou'dn't wrong him of a straw to be made Lord Chief Justice.” Then, taking another glass, he continued, “Pure stuff, master; I gets it over by means of a friend, who has as snug a boat as ever crossed the Goodwins: and only, that I mayn't do as I likes, and should fight shy of the penalty, I vou'd set up a varehouse myself, and supply
[Page 308]
my friends vith sperits of my own importance.”
“You have an excellent stock,” said I, “which nature has given you, and which, with proper correction, will not be amenable to the laws.”
The turnkey's vanity grew strong as his articulation became weak, and he was just falling asleep, when the clock struck one.
“There goes the little-von,” said he, starting up, and taking another draught, “and I must go to our club: ve expects a great debate to-night, and I shall be vanted to give my wote. I alvays goes for two reasons, to vatch and to promote enflamation.”
“Information you mean,” said I.
The tippling politician, overwhelmed with stupor, sunk into a profound sleep. The key of the room was on the inside: his snoring prevented the possibility of any slight noise being heard:—the moment
[Page 309]
was propitious, and I passed the threshold uninterrupted.
After locking my lynx in his own den, I proceeded down a long dark passage with trembling agitation. Every breeze that whispered alarmed me, and I scarcely knew what I was doing. In my hurry to escape, I had forgot to take a light, and was proceeding, without the least knowledge of the avenues of the prison, in total darkness, when I perceived a moon-beam entering at an iron grate, which served to pour a narrow stream of light and air into the ground floor of the building. The bar, which divided this little aperture, was corroded with rust, and the wood-work, which composed the frame, being softened by the humidity of the situation, on applying all my strength, the whole gave way. My joy was excessive, for I was too far distant from my snoring turnkey, to admit the possibility of his hearing me.
[Page 310]
CHAP. XLV. I found myself in a small court, encompassed by lofty walls, and guarded by a railing of iron planted in every direction. The clearness of the night afforded me an opportunity of contemplating the situation, and I found it no less terrible than that from which I had escaped. After standing like a statue that was petrified, during several minutes, the moon-beams, by removing the shadow from one side of the court, discovered a small casement-window: my heart bounded with hope, and I listened to hear if the apartment to which it belonged was inhabited.
All was silent as death, both within the house and the prison. At least I knew that the turnkey was yet sleeping, and my resolution was not wholly exhausted.
[Page 311]
Time flew rapidly till the break of day; when, still fixing my eyes on the casement-window, I perceived a human form, with the face towards me. The light was not sufficiently clear for me to discover the features, but by the dress I could faintly distinguish that it was a female.
“If an atom of pity warms your heart,” said I earnestly, “assist me in escaping from these infernal regions. I am innocent of any crime, and will reward you liberally.”
No answer was returned: my heart beat with a mixture of anxiety and hope; the woman retired from the window, and I was again reduced to despair.
Not daring to call aloud, lest I should alarm the prison, I waited with agonizing impatience, still fixing my eyes on the little casement, when in a moment, to my infinite joy, I saw a sheet descend, to the corner of which was fastened a
[Page 312]
second, and that attached; firmly to a strong iron bar which divided the window. The wall was built with rugged stone; and, my situation being desperate, I did not stay to examine the difficulty of ascending. Resolution gave new strength to every sinew; and, the consciousness that the only alternative was misery, enabled me to surmount all impediments. In a few minutes I reached the window, and pulled the linen-ladder after me, when a new obstacle presented itself; the iron bar was immoveable, and the space on each side so narrow, that it was wholly impossible for me to enter the chamber. Again the female approached the casement. Oh God! my heart shivers while I recollect the sensation of that moment! It was Julie de Beaumont.
“You snatched me from confinement, generous Walsingham!” said the, taking my hand and kissing it, “and
[Page 313]
Heaven has permitted me in return to be your preserver.”
I could make no answer; the astonishment, the joy, the terror that seized upon my heart, almost overpowered me, and I seated myself on the low parapet, scarcely conscious where I was, or what I did. She conjured me to find a more secure place; lest I should be seen from the prison; Again I arose, but my head was so giddy that I was near falling from the house-top, when Julie, stretching forth her arm, pulled me back, and saved me.
“Conceal youself,” said she, “behind the slanting roof of this apartment till the different lodgers quit their chambers. On the other side the house, there are several gareet windows which are not so strongly barricaded; at one of them most likely you may enter. Here it is impossible to give you hope; for this bar is so connected with the beam which,
[Page 314]
crosses the roof, that there is no chance of removing it without shattering the whole fabric.”
I now inquired what lodgers occupied the different chambers. She had been but one night in the house, and briefly informed me that the only persons she had seen were a sick gentleman with three children, and a methodist with his wife, who were the proprietors of the habitation. I followed her advice, and crept round the point of the roof till I came near another window. The casement having no curtain, I plainly perceived every thing that passed in the apartment.
At a table, which was scattered over with loose papers, sat an elderly man, deeply engaged in writing something which seemed to interest his feelings. A little boy was kindling a small fire, and two younger children were sleeping on a bed near the window. Several
[Page 315]
panes of glass being shattered, I seated myself near the jutting sides of the penthouse which covered the garret casement, and resolved patiently to wait my destiny.
I soon discovered that the tenant of this lofty apartment was an author, and that the work, on which he then employed his melancholy hours, was a Tragedy. Several passages, which he read aloud, convinced me that his talents were of no inferior order; his appearance and situation affected me strongly, and, by comparing his fate with my own, I received a sort of painful consolation, which, while it relieved my heart, attached it to his interest.
I remained some time in my airy concealment, when I began to lose every hope of the author's quitting his chamber by the sound of his door, which was locked and bolted every time his little son went out or returned with such
[Page 316]
necessaries as were wanted for the day's subsistence. I was on the point of discovering myself, when a knock at the room door arrested my steps. The little boy cautiously opened it, and a man entered, drest in a shabby suit of black, with short lank hair, and a countenance demurely sanctified. During a brief altercation I discovered that the visitor was the landlord, who came to menace the ill-fated author with an immediate seizure of his effects, unless he was paid a demand as far beyond the finances of his tenant, as he was inferior to his debtor in mental qualifications.
A warm debate ensued. The poet pleaded inability to pay, and the landlord urged the justice of his demand. “I have a work now nearly finished,” said the son of the Muses. “A bookseller has promised to give me five guineas for it when completed, and I will then pay you, at least a part of your demand.”
[Page 317]
“You owe me ten,” cried the hardhearted creditor; “and how shall I get the remainder in case you keep your word, which I much question? for poets are but liars, and propagators of prophane opinions. They are not curbed in their wicked propensities by the fear of hell, or the menaces of Heaven! Why are all poets poor? why are all poets ragged? why are all poets miserable? —Because they are full of sin! the dealers of the devil's cards! the makers of diabolical books, of lies, and wickedness!”
“Yet give me another week,” said the poor poet. “Consider my infants; if you drive them into the street they must perish!”
“The Lord will protect them ,” cried the sanctified persecutor. “But I must be paid ! I will no longer harbour the builder-up of those steps that lead down to the dark dwellings of Lucifer. Burn
[Page 318]
your wicked books!—your lying books! —your wanton books!—your prophane books of the devil's own inventing!— your Tragedies, and your Comedies, and your Parodies, and your Monodies; and all the abominable finery of Satan's library! But the Prince of Darkness will soon unfold the leaves of your abominations: he will sew you up in sheets of sulphur; he will hot-press you in his flaming workshop; he will bind you with hot iron. You will be read; but not read by the wicked!—not read by the idle!—not read by the wanton!— You will be red by the great oven of Belzebub!”
“I intreat you to be patient,” said the dejected author. “Consider that mercy is the first of Christian virtues!— that to comfort the forlorn, to shelter the unhappy, to feed the hungry, and clothe the naked, is the glory of humanity.”
[Page 319]
“How shall I be paid?” cried the pious dun. “Where shall I get my money?—I cannot stay preaching to you, wasting my words, and holding forth in the regions of abomination, while our poor flock is waiting in the fields under the broad blue canopy of Heaven for my approach. I cannot stay to hear your squalling brats crying for the adulterated bread of sin, while my children of grace, groaning in the true spirit of godliness, are longing for my presence!”
He was departing, when the poet caught his arm— “Only twelve hours!” said he, “I intreat, I conjure you to give me only twelve hours, and I will see what can be done.”
At this moment the landlord's betterhalf, if quantity may be allowed to take place of quality, rushed into the chamber, with “Turn the vagabonds out: the bailiff is below; seize their goods;
[Page 320]
don't stand parleying here while your congregation is waiting for you. I'll stay and see things done as they should be. These are not times for honest folks to feed a parcel of starving imps with the bread of holiness. Such vagrants as these only turn our labours in the field of salvation into ridicule, sow the weeds of controversy among the upright, and teach the lambs of our pasture to think for themselves instead of listening to us, who walk in the true path of religion.”
“For pity's sake,” said the poet, “do not urge me on to desperation!— Reflect, that religion's purest attribute is humanity; that the hand of true benevolence will never be raised towards the throne of Mercy, without receiving the reward it merits.”
“None of your wicked and profane canting!” cried the landlord. “The canter shall canter down the broad road
[Page 321]
of perdition!—he shall go full gallop!— he shall tumble off, and he shall be destroyed!”
The landlord departed, and his wife having given the signal, in a few moments the bailiff rushed in, while the unhappy family, the poor poet and his half-famished children, were consigned to despair. I could no longer resist the impulse of my heart, but, leaping in at the window, occasioned a new scene of consternation.
[Page 322]
CHAP. XLVI. The landlady's shrieks brought Mademoiselle de Beaumont to the apartment, and the group presented a variety which would have afforded an excellent subject for the pencil of Hogarth.
My appearance placed me above the suspicion of being a robber, and it was instantly concluded that I was a concealed gallant of their new inmate. The sanctified dame, whose power in the great scene of events was infinite, turning all the strong artillery of abuse against the trembling Julie, diverted the tide of suspicion from me, and thereby ensured my safety. I informed the deputy of the law that if he would adjourn with me to the next coffeehouse, I would settle the business. A guinea, neatly slipped into his hand,
[Page 323]
purchased acquiescence, and, taking an hasty leave of the astonished poet, I quitted the apartment.
We entered a public-house in the neighbourhood; the landlord was sent for. I waited with anxious impatience for his arrival, and dreaded every moment the loss of my own liberty. At length he came; having abruptly quitted his rostrum, and left his gaping multitude under the pretext of sudden indisposition. Not conscious that I had heard his morning debate with Mr. M'Arthur —for such was the name of the reduced and neglected poet—he put on the placid mask of solemnity, and, stealing into an obscure parlour, bowed with the humility of a true disciple.
“It grieves me sorely!” said he sighing; “it grieves me mightily, that my lodger has been troubled by the hand of persecution!—The Lord knows that my heart is open to the unhappy;
[Page 324]
that my hand is ever stretched forth to raise the afflicted! But my wife is given to wrath!—She is one of the hasty!—she has a brawling tongue, and peace dwells not with her!—She wants money to pay for the bread of our industry, and she will take no denial. We consume not our money in feasting, nor in guzzling, nor in wine-bibbing; not in gaudy apparel. We live soberly and holily! We mortify the flesh, and we purify the spirit!”
“How much does Mr. M'Arthur owe you?” said I.
“He owes me fifteen pounds,” replied the landlord; modestly adding five since the demand in the morning.
I put my hand into my waistcoat to search for my pocket-book, when, to my infinite consternation, I found that it was gone. Whether I had lost it in the prison, in the apartment of wretchedness, going along the street, or in passing
[Page 325]
the outward room of the public-house, which was thronged with guests, I knew not. Only three guineas remained, which were in my purse; and I was now involved in a situation more perplexing than ever.
With the most awkward embarrassment I unfolded my situation, and offered to give any security in my power for Mr. M'Arthur's release from his hard-hearted creditor. Nothing would do but the money, or a draft upon some person of known property and reputation. Time was precious; every hour presented danger, and I was bewildered almost to frenzy, when Mademoiselle de Beaumont, who had watched me from the window of Mr. M'Arthur's apartment, came running into the room with a countenance of joy. “The debt is discharged,” exclaimed she. “The most liberal, the worthiest of men, has given the sum to Mr. M'Arthur, and
[Page 326]
he is now embracing his little family overwhelmed with tears of rapture!”
“To whom did Heaven grant the supreme gratification of such a benevolent action?” said I; “and why, amidst all my sorrows, am I deprived of one blissful moment, which would have more than overpaid them?”
“Ah!” cried Julie, bursting into tears, “he is the ministering angel of benevolence! He snatched me from the confines of the grave! He beheld me, struggling with my adverse fate; meditating the last act of frenzied desperation; and, by forcing me from the fatal spot, preserved a life that shall be devoted to gratitude.”
We all hastened back to Mr. M'Arthur's chamber, where we found the father, silently indulging the sensations of his full and throbbing heart; while his children were weeping tears of joy, and fondly hanging round their benefactor,
[Page 327]
in whose features I instantly recognized —the rattling—punning—laughing Optic!
He started from his seat, and shaking my hand, interrupted the words I was going to utter, in praise of his noble philanthropy, with, “Ha! Mr. Montagu! how fares it with you in this world of dulness and depravity? Yet why should I ask you this question? You are the associate of genius and virtue!” A look of regard, directed towards Mr. M'Arthur, marked the meaning of his words, and was instantly repaid by a modest bow of acknowledgment.
“Your kindness will overwhelm me,” said the poet; “your benevolent actions know no bounds!”
“True,” replied Mr. Optic, “they lead to my own gratification, which is indeed boundless.” Then, turning towards me, he continued, “What brought you to this apartment? This is highly
[Page 328]
honourable to your taste, and proves, beyond contradiction, that your propensities are lofty.”
“That I soared is unquestionable,” answered I; “but I was aided by a pitying spirit.” A glance which signified caution, checked my tongue, and reminded me of my perilous situation.
A new scene of vicissitude at this instant attracted our attention. The sanctified landlord, instead of receiving the money extorted from Mr. M'Arthur, was, by the same bailiff, arrested for treble the sum. The writ had been some days in his pocket, at the suit of the publican, to whose house we had adjourned, for liquors; to the use of which the puritanical landlord, and the meek wife of his bosom, were inordinately addicted. The concluding scene was therefore more than commonly striking, and like a sprightly epilogue to a deep and soul-tearing tragedy, sent the
[Page 329]
spectators away in tolerable spirits, with the reflection, that much moral good sometimes springs from the source of apparent evil.
After taking leave of Mr. M'Arthur and his friend Optic, I quitted the house, as much at a loss which road to take as though I had at that moment landed on a desert island, I strolled about the streets till evening, and then, after a struggle betwixt gratitude and despondency, resolved to throw myself once more on the candour and hospitality of Mrs. Woodford.
She received me with the most impressive kindness. I told her all that had happened, except the material circumstance of my complete bankruptcy. Still I assumed the name of Montagu, and waited impatiently for an interview with Miss Woodford, which might enable her to explain the mystery by which she had discovered my real situation.
[Page 330]
Mademoiselle de Beaumont having promised, by her appearance in the court of justice, to exonerate me from the charge of murder, the only circumstance remaining against me was the rescue of Mr. Randolph: but that event seemed irremediable; I was too poor to pay the debt, and too proud to expose my name to the censure which would follow detection, or to the penalty which the law would inflict for a violation of propriety. The predicament in which I was involved seemed to preclude every hope of adjustment; Mrs. Woodford, however, assured me, that her house should be my asylum; and I agreed to keep my retreat wholly private, by concealing myself in the apartments on the second floor, till I could obtain some tidings of Colonel Aubrey and the family of Glenowen.
On the evening of my return to Mrs. Woodford's, I wrote letters to Lady
[Page 331]
Aubrey, to Mr. Hanbury, and to Bath, without mentioning what had passed since my arrival in London, or the place of my abode. I requested them to direct their answers to the Mount Coffee-house in Grosvenor-street, and to let me know whether or not Colonel Aubrey had sailed for Gibraltar. By the newspapers of the day, I found that “Lord Linbourne still languished beyond the faintest hope of recovery;” that “his antagonist,” without mentioning his name, “had suddenly departed, as was supposed, for the continent.” To this intelligence was added another paragraph to the following effect:
“A certain Lady, of fashionable notoriety, who eloped from Bath with a young Welsh Baronet, found that her beauty could not counteract the depravity of her conduct; for the juvenile enamorato took his leave, after travelling only a few miles, leaving
[Page 332]
the Lady “to think on what was past, and sigh alone.”
This intelligence rather vexed than pleased me. The idea that Sir Sidney Aubrey had relinquished Isabella was too delightful to admit of my envying his success with Lady Emily Delvin.
I had scarcely time to conclude the paragraph, when an advertisement met my eye that overwhelmed me with chagrin. It contained a description of my person, with my real name; related the rescue of Mr. Randolph, and offered five hundred pounds reward to any person who would apprehend and convey me to a justice of the peace. I now discovered the source from which Miss Woodford had obtained her intelligence, and my mortification was infinite; for the idea of being detected in a falsehood was, to me, the most terrible of all humiliations.
[Page 333]
I remained several days in my concealment, receiving no visitors, except Mrs. Woodford, her amiable daughter, and Mr. Optic; on whose honour and humanity we confidently relied, from a thorough conviction that, with all the apparent vivacity of his nature, his mind and heart were amply stored with the most inestimable qualities! He passed many evenings with me, and by his friendly counsel consoled my afflictions. He united with me in commiserating the frailty of human nature, and in the just opinion that a love of virtue, springing from sentiments of instinctive reason, as beneficial to mankind and society in general, was the true basis of religion; the foundation of every moral good, and the first distinction which man could evince in this scene of perpetual vicissitude.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
[Page ]
VOL. III.
[Page ]
CHAP. XLVII. There was a beautiful sincerity in Miss Woodford's mind, and an unaffected simplicity in her manners, that invited confidence and secured esteem. She was wholly unconscious of guile, and therefore implicitly relied on the rectitude of others. Polished by a foreign education, she disclaimed the conceited formality of modern fastidiousness; at the same time that a correct judgment, joined to extreme delicacy of sentiment, kept her mind wholly uncontaminated by the
[Page 2]
vices and deceptions of fashionable society. To these attractions Nature had given a person beautifully commanding! tall, fair, finely formed, with light auburn hair, and eyes beaming with sensibility that bespoke the purest and most gentle affections. She had yet a stronger claim to interest my feelings; a claim, not more singular than dangerous! She resembled, fatally, strikingly resembled, Isabella.
Her attentions were unremitting: she procured books from the library of her cousin Lady Kencarth, and we generally passed many hours of the day in reading the best authors. I had been accustomed to study, when Isabella was my companion: the recollection of past scenes incessantly occurred; and, driven as I was from every hope; persecuted by fortune; exiled from my native home; with an heart no less proud than susceptible; the soothing voice, the sympathizing
[Page 3]
sighs, and the generous solicitude which Miss Woodford displayed, afforded me the only consolation I was capable of receiving.
The post returned, but it brought no letters either from Bath or Glenowen. My inquietude augmented daily, and my poverty presented a prospect replete with horrors. I could not bear to subsist on Mrs. Woodford's bounty, and I was not at liberty to make any experiment, whereby I might obtain the means of life. My health began to decline; a perpetual fever preyed upon my spirits; my mind, struggling betwixt pride and sensibility, became indolent, and I could entertain no thought with tolerable satisfaction but that of annihilation. Yes, Rosanna! I shudder while I write the words—self-annihilation!
This dreadful propensity possessed my imagination incessantly. It was the subject of my daily thoughts, my nightly
[Page 4]
dreams. I longed, I panted for repose, while I felt a silent monitor within, reprobating the only act by which I could obtain it. The evident solicitude which Amelia evinced, tended rather to augment than to diminish my fatal propensity. Every kind and gentle word reminded me of Isabella; that Isabella, whose dawning beauties charmed me; that mild endearing angel! whose presence had enlivened the solitude of my early days, and filled my mind with hopes fatal and illusive!
Hour after hour, as my heart became softened by sorrow, as a portion of its fortitude wasted, Amelia's kindness seemed to supply the vacuum, till she became in some measure a part of my existence. I knew that I was miserable; but I was no less sensible that, without her society, I should be still many degrees more wretched; and sharing but a small portion of worldly consolation, I was doubly
[Page 5]
grateful, while I reflected, that almost the whole of what I did experience originated in her generous solicitude.
I had in confidence unfolded to Amelia the leading events of my disastrous life; only concealing the names of those who were the prominent figures in the dark and mournful history. Often did she condemn the capricious conduct which disgraced Isabella, and the volatile libertinism which contaminated the noble generous mind of Sir Sidney. The sordid heart of Lady Aubrey was the theme of perpetual abhorrence; and the gallant veteran, who had become my voluntary patron, frequently claimed a tear of enthusiastic admiration: yet the whole group was known to her merely as individuals; their names, rank, and situation I cautiously concealed. There was a fatality in every thing I undertook; and I was, by the most untoward events, added to a reserve of conduct
[Page 6]
which was wholly unnatural to my feelings, destined to carry on the lengthening tale of sorrow, till the closing scene shall consign me and my misfortunes to the oblivion of the grave.
I had been the inmate of Mrs. Woodford's hospitable mansion near three weeks, when she received a letter from her former lodger, acquainting her that he should be in London in ten or twelve days at farthest, and requesting that the apartments which he usually occupied, might be ready for his reception. The letter was read before Amelia and myself; she trembled, grew pale, and, to conceal her distress, abruply quitted the room. Her conduct surprized me. I endeavoured in vain to account for agitation so marked and sudden. Mrs. Woodford paid little attention to Amelia's distress; and shortly after leaving me, I entered into a train of reflections on the subject. I shuddered to interpret
[Page 7]
the symptoms of inquietude, while vanity whispered—for vanity is more or less the inmate of every bosom—yes, Rosanna, it whispered with the strong emphasis of nature—Amelia loves you!
Whatever is gratifying to self-love we most readily believe. For the first time I dreaded to meet Miss Woodford; I doubted my own fortitude; I examined my heart; I beheld its lacerated fibres, wounded by jealousy, neglected by scorn! I recollected Amelia's strong resemblance to Isabella; I shrunk—I trembled! I would have flown—but whither could I go? My situation was perilous and perplexing. At this moment Amelia entered the apartment—I would have passed her, and escaped, but she caught my arm, and gently detained me: “Whither are you flying?” said she, with a tone that pierced my heart; “I have brought some books, and wish you to read with
[Page 8]
me. We shall not pass many days more together.”
As she spoke her voice became tremulous, and a convulsive movement about her lip discovered the perturbation of her bosom.
She placed chairs near a window, and leading me towards one of them, I took my seat without the power to resist.
“How often shall I sit in this dear corner, Walsingham?” said she; “and how sincerely shall I lament that hours of happiness are seldom ordained to be lasting!”
I made no reply—my heart beat high with gratitude: I opened the book—it was a French edition of Estelle. Again she interrupted me—
“In a few weeks—perhaps days—O God! what shall I be?”
“Happy, I trust,” said I, not daring to encounter her eyes, or to ask an explanation of her conduct.
[Page 9]
“Miserable!” exclaimed Amelia.
“Heaven forbid!” said I, closing the book, and looking fearfully towards her: she blushed—became more agitated—and, rising hastily, retired to the other window. After remaining there for several minutes—while I continued in a bewildering reverie—she again returned; and, with a beautiful smile of self reproof, which had also something in it of conscious exculpation, she exclaimed—“What a fool am I!”
Though I dreaded the power of her affection, I was piqued at the very shadow of her treating it with levity. She took the volume from my hand, and, opening it, read the following passage—
“Fuis, malheureux! fuis, il en est tems encore. Dans un instant tu ne le pourras plus. C'est ici que l'amour t'attend pour te soumettre à son empire. Que je te plains! tu ne le connais pas
[Page 10]
ce redoutable amour! Ah! puisses-tu ne le connoître jamais! puisses-tu ne jamais sentir les maux que cause l'absence, les pleurs que fait verser la crainte, les tourmens de la jalousie, et les chagrins fans raison, et les torts que l'on ne veut pas croire! I sidore! mon chere Isidore! je suis moi-même un triste exemple des malhereux que fait l'amour! Tremble de devenir encore plus à plaindre que moi!—tremble—”
As she concluded these words, she burst into an agony of tears, and throwing the volume on the ground, rushed out of the apartment.
”Is it so?” exclaimed I. “It must be so! my prophetic heart did not deceive me.—Amelia, the gentle, the angelic Amelia, loves the forlorn, the wretched Walsingham!”
The joy of that moment was sudden and electric! I, who had been rejected,
[Page 11]
trifled with, despised, forgotten! in the midst of poverty and disgrace! hopeless, and meditating the most terrible of all decisions, found a generous amiable woman, who loved me—who dared avow that love! I was bewildered with contending conflicts.—Resentment for past injuries, pride, sensibility, revenge, rushed into my heart, and almost deprived me of reason. I retired to my chamber, made excuses for not appearing during the remainder of the evening, and passed the night sleepless, bewildered, wild, afflicted, and yet gratified. Yes, Rosanna, supremely, exquisitely gratified! to know that in this restless sphere of persecution, one gentle, feeling bosom throbbed with affection for the ill-fated Walsingham!
When hidden fears the bosom tear,
   And love no longer cheats the breast:
Hope comes to break the spells of care,
   And give that tortured bosom Rest!
[Page 12]
The world looks gay! the shadows past,
   All nature smiles, by Fancy drest;
But soon the day of bliss o'ercast,
   Will prove how short a lover's Rest!
The gentle breeze that o'er the main
   Scarce seems to move the halcyon's nest,
Soon yields to Winter's potent reign,
   And storms succeed the transient Rest!
Then let the wretch whom pleasure flies,
   Ne'er think that rapture's sons are blest;
For Apathy alone supplies
   The sweet, the envied balm of Rest!
[Page 13]
CHAP. XLVIII. On the following day Miss Woodford seemed to be less agitated, and conversed with me in a tone of voice more determined than I had ever before witnessed; she appeared to be perfectly mistress of herself, and to have resolved on some event which had rendered her mind entirely decided. I was little pleased with her evident placidity: the dawning ray of consolation which beamed through her eyes, when suffused with tears of sensibility, seemed wholly to vanish when they encountered mine with the sober dignity of returning reason. I wondered at the change; I was piqued at it, because I fancied that I was again the dupe of my own self-love, and the make-game of a capricious girl. The day passed in sullen chagrin on my part,
[Page 14]
and distant politeness on hers. Mrs. Woodford regretted our approaching separation, and Amelia smiled whenever it was mentioned. I was at a loss to interpret the meaning of such extraordinary conduct, and waited impatiently for the hour of elucidation.
On the following day Mrs. Woodford being engaged with some fashionable morning visitors, I availed myself of the opportunity, and quitted my apartment in search of Amelia.—I found her in her music-room with her master, and requested that they would allow me the gratification of augmenting their party; she only replied by a bow of acquiescence, and the morning's studies went on without interruption. She sung and touched the harp most enchantingly. The day's practice being finished, her master took his leave; she rose, and would have departed also; but I detained her; she did
[Page 15]
not so far flatter me as to fear a private interview; the self-collected serenity of her countenance convinced me that I was to her an object of perfect indifference.
“I congratulate you, Miss Woodford,” said I, bowing coldly and respectfully; “I most sincerely congratulate you on the sudden and commanding severity of your conduct. The soft sensibility, the beautiful confusion of your manner, when last I had the happiness of seeing you unobserved by maternal eyes, rendered you too dangerous an object for me to contemplate with safety to my repose. You are now the proud, the fashionable Miss Woodford; as such I can respect, I can admire you.”
“I desire no more,” said Amelia, with some hesitation; “for I seldom permit my hopes to lead me beyond the probability of success. You are the devoted lover of an unknown object;
[Page 16]
and Heaven forbid that I should inflict a jealous pang on any heart that is worthy of your affections.”
The formal and placid manner with which she pronounced these chilling words mortified, and at the same time irritated my feelings. She watched my countenance with a fixed and steady gaze. I made no reply—She again addressed me.
“Your friendship, your esteem I may still accept, without violating my engagements to a worthy being who claims that heart, which, had I the power to bestow it, should be—” She paused.
“Do not hesitate, Amelia; pronounce the word,” said I, “whether it be hostile to my hopes, or decisive of my fate—I am prepared for either.”
“Then,” said she, changing colour, and advancing towards the door, “had this foolish feeling heart been mine to
[Page 17]
give, you would have been its master— but in a few, a very few days, I shall be—”
“What?” cried I, eagerly.
“The wife of another!” replied Miss Woodford, sighing: “the husband of my mother's choice will claim my hand; but my days will be devoted to misery! From this hour we must only meet in society. I cannot, without violating the propriety of virtue, allow you another interview of this nature. I knew not that your affections were engaged—I fancied, indeed I hoped, that they were not. As it is, I must learn to bear my adverse fortune—to look forward with resignation—and to forget you!” She was going.
“Yet stay, Amelia,” said I, “stay only a moment, and hear my last acknowledgments. Your kindness, your generosity will overwhelm me. Your virtues deserve a better fate than that
[Page 18]
which would await you as my wife— Honour me with your friendship, your esteem—”
“I comprehend you, Walsingham,” said Miss Woodford, bursting into tears; “you are sufficiently explicit. Inflict not a new pang of humiliation—I do not deserve to suffer—We must part for ever!”
She tore herself from my trembling hand, which had not power to detain her, and rushed out of the apartment.
At dinner I only found Mrs. Woodford.— Amelia, wishing to avoid meeting me, was absent on a visit to Lady Kencarth. The day appeared insufferably tedious, till we were relieved by the pleasantry and wit of my friend Optic. Miss Woodford, late in the evening, sent a message to inform her mother that she should accompany Lady Kencarth to the opera, and from thence to a supper at the Duchess of Riversford's,
[Page 19]
which would detain her till a very late hour; I therefore resigned all hopes of seeing or conversing with her, at least for that night.
In the course of the evening we were abruptly broke in upon by Doctor Pimpernel.—He entered the drawing-room before I was aware of his approach, and it was then too late to avoid him. My cold and ceremonious greeting convinced him of the contempt in which I held his neglect of me in the moment of calamity, and for a short time checked his natural flow of boisterous loquacity. But on Mrs. Woodford's quitting the room, the torrent which had gradually augmented by constrained silence, broke forth with redoubled fury: the first symptom of his recovery from the confusion of conscious unworthiness, was his inquiries after Amelia. “She is in love with you, my noble fellow—by G---d,
[Page 20]
she is!” exclaimed the doctor; “and you must have her.”
“I understand that Miss Woodford's hand is already engaged,” said I.
“So much the better,” cried the doctor; “you will have the greater chance of success. Besides, she is going to marry a fellow, who was destined by nature to wear the badge of nobility: His brows were meant to exhibit the honours of his family.”
“But has the girl's innocence no claim to the consideration of an honourable mind?” said Mr. Optic.
“Every claim,” replied the doctor; “and therefore Mr. Montagu will do well to take it out of such precarious keeping.”
“You mean that he should rob her of her repose, in order to prove his regard for its safety, then! This is strange doctrine!” cried Mr. Optic;
[Page 21]
“but the prescriptions of all those who profess to mend the constitution, are generally experimental.”
“There is nothing like it!” said the doctor. “What is the broad sun of intellectual light! but an experimental circle of new and extensive knowledge? The effulgent lamp of liberty—”
“Chears with its rays the most unworthy objects,” said I, “while unprotected innocence is suffered to languish in a prison.”
The doctor was disconcerted; he hemmed, coughed, and rubbed his forehead, but made no answer.
“Yet,” continued I, fixing my eyes on his countenance, “there are men who, while they are undermining the peace of unoffending intimates, preach the language of universal benevolence! who, while persecuted virtue trembles at the arrogance of vice, uphold the profligate and stigmatize the innocent!
[Page 22]
Men who, the promoters of licentious oppression, the enemies of domestic happiness, are the brawlers for philanthropy, and at the same moment the destroyers of every social comfort.”
“I believe it, I believe it, my noble fellow!” cried the doctor. “What a fund of knowledge you possess! I have long made similar observations, and lament that such men should be permitted to disgrace the scenes of humanized society. But, as my book says, ‘The whole mass must be purified before the head will recover its original sanity—the fountain cannot flow clear while the source is muddy.’ Read my voluminous work—my world of information— my Barley-water panacea—my immortal recipe for degenerated humanity! But it cannot last long; intellect begins to set things right! Virtue will electrify—it will awaken the torpedo— it will take its proper sphere—it will
[Page 23]
mount like phlogisticated air—it will prove the inevitable and tremendous piacularis of the great catalogue of disasters which have too long disgraced the wide theatre of the universe! Doleful and I know how things are! we think like men—we anticipate like prophets—we reason like philosophers! A propos !—Mind, Doleful, that you notice my book in your next patriotic poem. By the transcendent powers of sublime harmony, you are the only poet that ever lived in this or any other country! Excepting my Barley-water work, your last production is the purest, the most enlightened in our language.”
The sapient philosopher was stopped short in his incomprehensible rhapsody by the return of Mrs. Woodford. The conversation changed, and I retired to my apartment little satisfied with the events of the preceding twelve hours.
[Page 24]
CHAP. XLIX. My mind being much depressed on the following morning, I declined going down to breakfast. Mrs. Woodford, fearing that my absence proceeded from indisposition, made me a visit of inquiry, and expressed her concern in language so friendly, that my spirits experienced a momentary renovation; I still requested that she would excuse me at dinner, and remained in my chamber, wholly subdued by melancholy reflections.
The period rapidly advanced when I should be obliged to seek a new asylum. Almost exhausted by the perpetual inquietude of my situation, I began to think that even the most dreadful certainty was preferable to the hopes and fears of an undecided fate. I was so accustomed to incessant changes of sorrow,
[Page 25]
that any fixed plan of misery would have been a kind of termination far more desirable than a variety of wretchedness. I could have reconciled my mind to any one event, however terrible; but the varying griefs, the daily, the hourly encroachments of sorrow, the hydra-headed persecuting calamities that incessantly rose up, eternally exposing my fortitude to new trials, had wearied me into despair, and was at length become insupportable.
With regard to Miss Woodford, I was no less perplexed than I was with the inauspicious prospect of my fortune. I could have loved her, had I not known Isabella; and yet, having known her, Amelia, by reminding me of her loveliness, could not be an object of indifference to my heart: I could have passed all my hours in contemplating the one, merely because she resembled the other; but the instant that imagination whispered something more than esteem,
[Page 26]
something that attached by stronger bonds than common admiration, love presented the original idol to my fascinated fancy, and reproved my apostacy at the same moment that it confirmed my despair.
I was grieved to find that Miss Woodford would shortly be torn from my society.—She was the only solace I could find, alone as I was, even amidst multitudes of men: her absence would leave a vacuum, which time would not have power, to supply. I had endured the torture of unbosoming my long-treasured griefs; I had found in her a kind and sympathizing spirit; she gave me sigh for sigh; she seemed to feel more interested every moment, as I proceeded in the dark account of sorrow. I felt certain, that nothing in this scene of sublunary anguish could ever again induce me to retrace the progress of my weary journey.
[Page 27]
Rosanna! how little did I know my destiny!—how far was my imagination removed from that hope which might have presented a gentle and compassionating angel, like yourself!
In the evening Mrs. Woodford made me a second visit, and proposed that I should accompany her and Amelia to a masquerade in Portland-place. “I have tickets,” said she; “and as your disguise will prevent the possibility of your being discovered, you must not refuse to be our chaperon. ”
I made many excuses, pleaded indisposition, and still a more powerful objection, a dislike to every species of dissipated amusement. Mrs. Woodford rallied me on the pedantic fastidiousness of my refusal, promised to return early, and assured me that the house would be thronged with the first people in the courtly circles.
[Page 28]
“The fair hostess,” said she, “is the very model of elegance; the high priestess of taste, and the arbitress of all our fashionable amusements. You will meet half the nobility in the kingdom; your imagination cannot form an idea of the splendour and delight which will gratify your eyes, and exhilarate your spirits.”
Amelia said but little; yet one intreating glance of hers almost decided my resolution; when Mrs. Woodford continued—
“You must go; indeed you must. All the world will be there, to laugh at poor Lady Emily Delvin, whom Mrs. Heartwell has invited for no other purpose.”
“I will attend you,” said I.
The hope of hearing what was become of Isabella determined me instantly to accept the invitation. Dominos were
[Page 29]
provided for Mrs. Woodford and myself; but my heart throbbed with agony when Amelia presented herself in the simple habit of a Welsh peasant girl—a species of disguise in which I had often seen Isabella, when she entered into the spirit of the village fêtes near Glenowen, and which always rendered her more beautiful than the most studied adornments of fashion could have done. As she came into the room I started as though I had seen a spectre.—The short jacket, half concealing her bosom, and the large black hat, adorned with a wild bouquet of flowers, which shaded her countenance, throwing her features into shadow, concealed every dissimilarity, and she was the exact counterpart of Isabella.
I gazed like an idiot—Miss Woodford smiled—She knew that I was born in Wales; and, with bewitching attention, assured me that she wore the Cambrian
[Page 30]
brian habit in compliment to me.—I had not power to thank her, my whole soul was absorbed in contemplating the perfect resemblance of that divinity whose fascinations were yet unbroken; and who, notwithstanding all her follies, was still the supreme idol of my heart's warmest affections.
Before midnight we repaired to Mrs. Heartwell's—the rooms were crowded; the lively hostess indefatigable in the task of pleasing—and the company animated by the splendour of surrounding objects. Mrs. Woodford was soon recognized by many of her right-honourable connections, and the lovely Amelia was frequently committed to my charge, while her mother joined in the elegant clatter of refined nonsense. The indifference with which Miss Woodford mingled in the brilliant circle, confirmed the exalted opinion which I before entertained
[Page 31]
of her understanding; and we seated ourselves on a sofa to contemplate the motley group before us.
We had not been there many minutes, when a mask, taking his place beside us, looked earnestly at Miss Woodford, and with a sigh of admiration exclaimed —“Nymph of the mountains! more lovely than Hebe! more chaste than Diana! what strange fascination could have brought thee to this scene of splendid animation? Hast thou no sister wood-nymph, no guardian genii of thy native solitude to guide thy wandering footsteps through the mazes of dissipation?”
Miss Woodford answered—“Yes; the power of love, which brought me hither, has consigned my truant footsteps to the care of Virtue!”
“The power of Virtue has long been annihilated in these enchanting regions,” replied the mask. “Here only pleasure
[Page 32]
reigns, mocking the dull and freezing chains of chastity.”
This libertine remark was accompanied with a gentle pressure of the hand, while Miss Woodford rose abruptly from her fear to break the conversation.
A second mask now joined us; and, after gazing stedfastly at me for several minutes, the unknown visitor exclaimed—“Gods! were such women formed to bless plebeian arms?”
I felt the sarcastic personality, and could scarcely command my tongue.—The mask continued—
“Shall innocence and beauty be condemned to the degrading embraces of imputed vice?”
My blood boiled with indignation.—Amelia conjured me, in a whisper, not to notice the implied insult—“It is only an effort of impertinent curiosity,” said she; “and, by discovering who you are, some empty fool will be gratified,
[Page 33]
while you expose yourself to every species of peril.”
The mask continued to follow us, and was shortly after joined by the other domino, who had addressed Miss Woodford while fitting on the sofa.—A female also augmented our group, and with most exalted effrontery seizing my arm, entered into familiar conversation. I had observed her, and the two original persecutors, in close conversation on our entering the room; I therefore concluded that they were known to each other.
“Pretty nymph of Cambria's misty hills!” cried the lady; “what will thy absent shepherd say, when he hears of thy inconstancy? when he is told that his innocent and blooming maid bestows her favours on a vulgar lover? Where is the plighted faith of rustic passion? where the meek delicacy of uncontaminated manners? There is
[Page 34]
a little bird perched on a lofty tree not far from hence who will tell all.”
“And upon my conscience,” cried a mask in the character of Silence, “when all is tould there is nothing at all to tell. I have been praching morality to half the company, and nobody understands the maning of my doctrines, except a young Welshman, who, by his dialect, was born on the continent. There is nothing so vulgar and ridiculous as betraying one's country by the manes of one's tongue.”
This mask I now discovered to be Mrs. O'Liffy; but the mention she made of ‘a young Welshman born on the continent,’ roused my heart to the most violent palpitation; for hope flattered me with the idea that it might be Sir Sidney Aubrey.
“Where did you leave the young Welshman?” said I—“How is he drest? what party does he come with?”
[Page 35]
“Ah now! be azey!” cried Mrs. O'Liffy. “The lad has a little smart doxey of his own—as pretty a girl as ever tripped over the swate bogs of Ireland! and you want to be after making mischief, I warrant you! ar'n't you content with one dear crater, but you must be monopolizing all the world, leaving the rest of the creation to live alone in solitude?”
Still I intreated her to satisfy my inquiries, and still she refused. Perceiving no chance of obtaining information from Mrs. O'Liffy, I resolved to pursue my own researches. I wandered amidst the mazy groups, examined every pair of bright eyes, that, like stars, gleamed through their sable curtain, but in vain.—Nothing was to be found like Isabella. Miss Woodford, mortified by my inattention, proposed quitting the rooms. “I need not draw you from the point of attraction,” said she with a
[Page 36]
tone of reproach; “one of Mrs. Heartwell's servants will call me a chair, and I can return, alone, if my mother wishes to remain here longer.
“Pardon me, I conjure you to pardon me,” said I. “My inattention will scarcely admit of an excuse—but you are all goodness! The person whom I wish to discover, is a dear friend; one from whom I have been too long estranged, and whose welfare deeply interests me. I knew not of her being in town.”
“I understood that the person was a man!” said Amelia, with evident surprise. I had not the power to deceive her. I scorned the idea of uttering a falsehood upon so interesting a subject, and therefore instantly replied, “No, Amelia; the object of my inquietude is a woman:—her! to whom I gave my heart before I had examined the sentiments of that bosom, in which I deposited
[Page 37]
all my hopes of terrestrial happiness.”
“I will return home,” said Miss Woodford, taking my arm, and trembling. “Pray conduct me to my chair, and make my excuses to my mother.” I will not interrupt a pursuit that promises you so much delight. I will leave you to seek the happy mortal, whose power can draw you from the society of friendship! She will be your future consolation!—your companion! She is not the promised wife of another; and you will find with her that felicity which I have not the power to bestow.” Her faultering voice convinced me that had her mask been withdrawn, I should have sunk to the earth with shame, for having extorted a tear of reproof from those eyes which had so often beamed with friendship and affection, for a wretch unworthy of her notice.
[Page 38]
“I will attend you home,” said I. “The just reproach which you have involuntarily uttered, has confirmed my decision. I will not draw upon my heart the pang of conscious ingratitude.”
“Then I command you, if you value my esteem, to stay,” cried Miss Woodford. “I disdain that proffered sacrifice, which is the offspring of gratitude alone. You might be grateful to the most indifferent object, where you fancied that your heart retained a sense of obligation. I shall depart alone. This is our last interview, unkind, ungracious Walsingham!”
As she concluded these words she broke from me, and rushed towards the door;—I followed. She hurried down the stairs, and desired one of Mrs. Heartwell's servants to call a chair. I still attended her, when a group which followed us thronged the hall—and a voice
[Page 39]
struck my ear with an electric force that almost deprived me of my senses; it was the voice of Isabella!
I quitted Miss Woodford's hand, and rushed among the crowd. The masks had considerably augmented, and all was bustle and confusion. The number of black dominos nearly presented a sombre similarity, which levelled all forms and features to one gloomy mass of insipidity. The only characters that met my eyes, were a Lady, in the robe, and with the attendant doves, of Venus; Lady Fubsy in the character of Zephyrus; little Casino as Diana; Mrs. Winkwell as a blue-eyed nun; Lady Ethiop as Desdemona; a Melpomene, laughing convulsively at the scene of confusion; and a Thalia, weeping for the loss of a portrait set with brilliants, which had been snatched from her bosom by a mask in the character of Justice; while a coxcomb, drest as an Anchoret, was
[Page 40]
whispering soft rapturous nonsense in her ear and consoling her with the celebrated but unappropriate lines,
“On her white breast a sparkling cross she wore,
Which Jews might kiss, and Infidels adore.”
This silly remark was drowned in the incessant gabble of Mrs. O'Liffy, in the character of Silence; while Lady Fubsy, with a voice more like Boreas than Zephyrus, vociferated—“Take care! you will break my wings.” The Venus now lost her doves; Miss Casino began to be heartily tired of her disguise; the blue-eyed Winkwell stole off with a handsome black friar; and the icy Anchoret returned to the rooms with his weeping Thalia, to arrange a delicious tête à tête for the ensuing evening.
A chair was brought into the hall; and just as Amelia was hastening towards it, I observed a lady stepping into a carriage at the door, dressed in a black
[Page 41]
gauze robe, spangled with silver. A gentleman in a domino followed. They seated themselves; and as the coach drew rapidly from the portico, I perceived (the lady unmasking) the features of Miss Hanbury. The impulse of the moment wholly subdued the powers of recollection and the decorum of bien séance , while, brushing by Lady Fubsy, and awkwardly tearing off one of her transparent wings, I rushed amidst the crowd. I was hastening to the portico, but the unzephyrlike hand of the angry Lady Fubsy forcibly held me, with “Sir, Sir, you have got my wing.”
“Do not detain me!” said I, scarcely knowing what I uttered; “I am flying in pursuit of a lady—”
“Not with my wing, by Heavens!” cried Lady Fubsy, interrupting me, and still grasping my arm. The whole circle laughed. I disengaged the silver pinion which had been entangled in the
[Page 42]
serpentine trimmings of my domino, and darted into the street. A coach, which was still hemmed in by the stoppage of carriages, instantly met my eye: it was of the same colour as that in which I had seen Isabella. I opened the door, and without ceremony entered. But how shall I describe my astonishment, when I found myself seated opposite to Mr. Winkwell and Miss Casino! The young lady, instantly placing her mask before her face, shrieked. The inconstant husband demanded my name, and the cause of such an outrage. I made a brief apology, and quitting the coach as suddenly as I had entered it, again darted along the ranks of noise and confusion. After peeping into at least a dozen carriages, and finding nearly as many old acquaintances with new faces,—none of whom wished to be recognized,—I hastened back in search of Miss Woodford. She was not to be found. I began to
[Page 43]
lose all patience, when a mask addressed me:—
“Dear Knight-errant,” said the fair forlorn, “will you see me to my carriage? I am really in distress for a Ciceroné ; and, unless you will have the gallantry to aid me, I shall be immolated by the abominable canaille !”
Almost unconscious of what I was doing, I took her hand, and her chariot door being opened by a pair of attendant cupids, she instantly stepped in: “Permit me to set you down?” said the soft syren; “you must not leave me so, preux chevalier ! I have yet to evince my gratitude, my admiration!”—Her voice was tuned to the dulcet tones of love; she pressed my hand;—I was half resolved to accept her invitation, when stooping forward, and whispering a decisive challenge, her outward mask fell off, and I discovered the Cytherean goddess to be no other than Lady Amaranth.
[Page 44]
Terrified and amazed, I made a precipitate retreat; and scrambling under the carriages, escaped the horrors that menaced me. At this moment a chairman was knocked down by the pole of a chariot; and I perceived two masks, with three servants in richly laced liveries, lifting Miss Woodford (who had fainted with the apprehension that her chairman was killed) into a vis-a-vis , near the scene of disaster. I darted towards her: one of the domestics, by order of his master, seized me by the collar. I struck him;—he fell;—a crowd collected; and in the busy interregnum, the vis-a-vis dashed through the line of carriages with that dignified impetuosity and refined inattention, which stoops not to regard the safety of a terrified multitude!
[Page 45]
CHAP. L. Having obtained information to whom the carriage belonged, I flew towards the mansion of the noble owner; and without hesitation demanded to speak with Miss Woodford. The servants denied knowing any such person; and the man who had seized me by the collar instantly called the watch. I darted through the vestibule, and abruptly entered a parlour, where I found Amelia in the most extreme agitation, attended by his Grace of Heartwing and Doctor Pimpernel. She flew towards me. “Oh, Walsingham!” said she, “how grossly have I been insulted!” The Duke would have wrested her from my hold, but I whirled him from me, and he fell. The doctor asserted the purity
[Page 46]
of his intentions; and assumed the merit of having snatched Amelia from imminent danger: swore he had saved her life; and blamed my impetuosity, which misconstrued the whole adventure.
I led Miss Woodford along the hall, amidst the insolent sneers and abusive reproaches of the well-tutored domestics. That was not the moment to chastise impertinence, or to expose my precious charge to a new scene of danger. We hastened into the street, drest as we were,—and were proceeding towards home, when two of the Duke's servants followed, and began to hustle me. Miss Woodford escaped and ran: I encountered my assailants, till the watch coming up, they thought fit to retreat. My rage and indignation were not to be described. I followed Amelia; and, to my infinite joy, found her safe with Mrs. Woodford.
[Page 47]
Conscious that the Duke would never forget my having counteracted his plan; and that the Doctor would be equally mindful of the wholesome reproof of the preceding evening; I found that it required some ingenuity to evade the machinations which their malice would put in practice against me. Mrs. Woodford was overwhelmed with consternation! She could not have thought that “a man of his Grace's rank would have acted so unworthily;” and she never would have believed, “that a man so idolized by the women as the Doctor, would enter into a plot for the destruction of innocence:” but she found, that experience itself might be deceived; and that one old woman has sometimes not only the contrivance to outwit another; but the power to expose duplicity, and to lay open profligate designs to the detestation of every indignant observer.
[Page 48]
Early in the morning Miss Woodford made a visit to Mrs. O'Liffy: a fatal visit! the result of which will appear hereafter. During their conversation Mrs. O'Liffy discovered a secret of no small importance: nothing less than a plot framed by Doctor Pimpernel to apprehend me, from the description of such a person in the newspapers; and to make the domestic, with whom I had the rencontre in Portland-place, the receiver of the reward, as a recompence for the blow which, in my own defence, I had inflicted. Miss Woodford concealed her alarm from Mrs. O'Liffy, and hastened home to apprise me of my danger.
My consternation was not more extreme than my resentment. The plan appeared to me so dastardly and vindictive, that I instantly wrote a challenge to the pupil of Esculapius, demanding immediate satisfaction, and desiring him to
[Page 49]
name the place and weapons. The note was dispatched, and I waited with angry impatience till the messenger returned with a brief answer, that “the law should very speedily settle the business.” Vexed, alarmed, and insulted, in the fury of my disappointment, I penned a letter to the Duke of Heartwing, informing him, that his conduct was not to be tolerated, and demanding that apology which should alone satisfy my wounded honour. My epistle was broke open, read, and then returned by the insolent servant, with the old verbal message, that “his Grace knew no such person.”
Amelia conjured me to suspend the hour of adjustment with my potent adversaries, and to secure my own immediate safety. Mrs. Woodford was sent for early in the morning to visit Lady Kencarth, who was taken suddenly ill at her villa near Windsor, and, with an
[Page 50]
aching heart, I took my leave of Amelia; once more destined to wander along the thorny path of hopeless affliction.
Previous to my departure I wrote a few lines to Mrs. Woodford, expressing my warm sense of gratitude for her kindness; and promising that, as soon as Fortune should favour me with the faintest smile, I would repay her generosity, and return to thank her.
The weighty load of obligation, which Mrs. Woodford's liberal conduct had heaped upon my mind, augmented my sufferings, and the manner in which I had been necessitated to quit her hospitable mansion, filled my breast with shame and compunction. Yet I had no alternative but disgrace, misery, and the loss of character: for such is the unfeeling decision of the world, that privation of liberty is deemed a stigma; while it is, in fact, the hard-dealing wretch who robs a fellow-creature of
[Page 51]
that valuable birth-right, who is disgraced; and who deserves to have his name blotted for ever from the records of humanity. Indeed, it has too long been the scandal of a nation which prides itself on the reputation of benevolence, that a vindictive extortioner should have the power to tear a wretched but industrious sufferer from his helpless family, and, to gratify a malevolent, fordid revenge, deprive him of every hope, even of existence, under the sanction of the law, and with the plausible pretext of unsullied equity.
But I shall expose those causes and effects of ruin and persecution in a future chapter. Experience enables me to paint their plausibilities, and their capabilities, their glaring extortions and insolent menaces, with feeling and exactitude.
With a mind irritated by the arrogance of pride, and the mean evasion of duplicity,
[Page 52]
I hastened to obtain counsel and consolation from my worthy friend Mr. Optic. I found him engaged with a bookseller, and bargaining for Mr. M'Arthur's tragedy. The liberal dispenser of literature offered fifty guineas for that same composition which a brother of the trade had rated as low as five. His generous proposal was accompanied by a promise to present the work to a relation, who was nearly connected with one of the London theatres, and to demand no share whatever in the profits of the piece, except what might arise from the sale of the copy. This fortunate event cheered the sinking heart of the oppressed votary of Melpomene, who sat with graceful diffidence in a corner of the room, while Mr. Optic performed the liberal task of friendship.
As soon as the bargain was concluded, I embraced the first moment to ascertain
[Page 53]
my former knowledge of Mr. M'Arthur, and, to my infinite astonishment, found that he was the same whom I had in my childhood met at Nice:—the generous disinterested friend of Mr. Hanbury; the liberal, honest preceptor of the profligate Lord Linbourne; the more than father of his early youth, the guardian of his fortune—though the unsuccessful tutor of his mind and morals.
From Mr. M'Arthur I found that the Viscount, as soon as he entered the world of splendour, in order to prove his friendship, had presented his tutor with that old-fashioned, but inestimable treasure, an innocent and artless wife. The young and blooming bride was a distant relation of his lordship's, and great advantages, as well as much domestic felicity, seemed the probable result of their union. Four years they lived happily, though not splendidly. Mrs. M'Arthur was as lovely as she was exemplary in
[Page 54]
all the decorous arrangements of social life: but the delusive dream of happiness was not eternal. The wily patron, by every artful stratagem, by every subtle machination of villany and fraud, pilfered the tutor's only treasure; undermined the affections of his wife, seduced, abandoned, and consigned her to irremediable sorrow, affording the world a new subject for conversation, (the zest of passion being no longer excited by the busy tongue of calumny,) by eloping with the lovely protegée of Lady Emily Delvin—the unfortunate Julie! Mrs. M'Arthur soon after died of a broken heart. Her husband, having indignantly relinquished the pecuniary emoluments arising from a situation obtained through the interest of his noble pupil, and being disinherited by his father, a Scottish baronet, for adhering to the political tenets of the Viscount, was shortly after consigned to
[Page 55]
the gloomy horrors of a prison. His principal creditor was an attorney, who had undertaken to sue for a divorce, which death concluded before the law could pronounce its decision.
From that period, Mr. M'Arthur had struggled against poverty and oppression till his fortitude was exhausted, and at last nearly overwhelmed; when one of his literary efforts falling into the hands of Mr. Optic, he discovered such strong traits of genius about it, that he resolved never to rest till he had made himself acquainted with the author. After many weeks of unremitting inquiry, he traced the neglected recluse to that obscure garret where I had found him, and where, on the third day of their acquaintance, an opportunity presented itself for the display of that philanthropy, which warmed and dignified the bosom of the liberal and humane Optic.
[Page 56]
Resolving to banish sorrow, we passed a social evening. Mr. Optic's spirits were exhilarated by the hope of Mr. M'Arthur's further successes in the world of literature; and, by promising to write a prologue for his tragedy, he gave the dejected author every reason to anticipate a warm and brilliant reception from the public.
I fixed my resting-place for that night at the house of Mr. Optic. The woe-exhausted poet was already an inmate of the hospitable dwelling: the evening passed swiftly; and rational conversation, enlivened by wit, quieted the furious fever of my morning's sensations, till I almost forgot the injuries I had experienced.
[Page 57]
CHAP. LI. It was not till I laid my head upon my pillow that I began to reflect on my new embarrassments. I slept but little, and my short slumbers were broken by a thousand visionary evils, adding their appalling shadows to the dreadful realities of affliction. I rose early, and again consulted Mr. Optic: he advised me to remain patiently at his house until some decisive intelligence should reach me respecting my relations, or some opportunity present itself which might place me in the road to more prosperous fortune. This restriction was painful to my feelings, which were too strongly awakened by curiosity to remain placid under the conviction that Isabella was so near me. I resolved to conceal myself during the day, but to employ the
[Page 58]
early part of every night in a research, which interested my heart far more than the dread of personal captivity.
Two days I vanquished my propensity, but on the third, at the dusk of the evening, I once more sallied forth—not like the famed knight of LaMancha—not to display my prowess in vanquishing an harmless windmill—but in evading the terrific hosts of that perpetually grinding law, which mixes the pure grain of oppressed honesty with the coarse chaff of fraud and villany; and, by incessant and indefatigable labour, sets reason, humanity, and justice at defiance.
I had scarcely proceeded the length of a street towards the west end of the town, where I purposed making inquiries after the health of Miss Woodford, when a thunder storm overtook me with such rapidity, that every coach was called from the nearest stand, and the rain pouring a deluge, I had no resource left
[Page 59]
but that of taking shelter under a gateway. I was not the only storm-driven refugee; the spot was thronged with pedestrians of various descriptions;—nymphs of the band-box, shivering beneath their shower-drenched habiliments; and venerable scouts, who are ever on the watch like the owls of twilight, and whose bosoms glow with phosphoric flames, snatched from the downcast eyes of modest beauty.
Among the variety of motley figures whom pelting necessity had drawn together, I observed a couple deeply engaged in conversation. The man was placed in shadow, and the idol of his devotion was tricked out in all the finery of vulgar allurement. The inamorato vowed adoration to her beauty, and the nymph, after some feigned scruples, consented that he should attend her to her lodgings. The dialogue had amused the surrounding spectators: the
[Page 60]
desperate gallantry of the hero, and the artful capitulation of the heroine, concluded by his stopping a stray coach at that moment, like the adventurous knight, in quest of a fair; and the amiable couple were just stepping into it when I discovered the features of my saint of the rostrum, the conscientious landlord of Clerkenwell. I could not let the delightful moment of retaliation escape me, but, whispering in his ear, “Now who canters down the broad road of perdition?” arrested his erring steps, and he staggered back to the gateway in evident consternation.
But where was the spirit-chastened look; the puritanical tone of devout exhortation? Where the rusty, shabby suit of sables, emblem of the deep mourning of a contrite heart? Where the tresses falling in lanky uniformity, and mocking the profane custom of frizzing, pinching, scenting, and powdering?
[Page 61]
—Alas! they had all vanished; while the little god of the twanging bow had decked the hypocritical apostate in a pair of neat half boots, a scanty, long backed, short-skirted, narrow-collared, little great coat, which hung round his lean form like his grandmother's winter cardinal; to which fashion had added a bludgeon two feet long, and a high-crowned hat, which would have concealed the features of Guy Vaux in his expedition, no less perilous than that which the arch impostor then meditated.
The only chance of escaping the disgrace, which would attend his exposure, seemed that of wholly denying his calling; but unluckily a second spectator in the throng identifying his person, the shouts and hisses became universal. The multitude groaned in the spirit; but it was the spirit of indignation. The affrighted Camelion swore
[Page 62]
and blustered, menaced me with his bludgeon, and at length, in the vehemence of his wrath, aimed a blow at my head. I returned it; a ring was instantly made, the metamorphosed preacher of piety and peace stripped off his outward garb, and the onset commenced with scientific precision.
A gentleman in the circle held the coat and waistcoat of my antagonist, and we had scarcely gone one round, when something dropped from the pocket of the latter. The courage of the pugilistic champion at once deserted him, and, without assigning any reason for giving in, he darted through the circle and ran; the mob shouting, and I laughing immoderately. In a few minutes I discovered that the object, which had struck terror to the soul of the impostor, was nothing less than my own lamented pocket-book, purloined, in the scene of Mr. M`Arthur's distress,
[Page 63]
by the meek partner of the persecuting landlord. On opening the little treasury, which when I lost it contained no less than three hundred pounds, I found that only one hundred and fifty remained; the rest having been laid out in decorating the honest pair for their debut in the circle of St. James's.
After requesting the attendance of two witnesses who had seen the pocketbook fall to the ground, we entered the hackney-coach, which was still in waiting, and hastened to the house of the impostor. But he had decamped early on the preceding morning, after selling his goods and chattels to an appraiser, and humanely turning Mademoiselle de Beaumont into the street, to seek for shelter in the abode of some more benevolent protector.
We now repaired to Mr. Optic's, and very fortunately he corroborated my testimony respecting the pocket-book,
[Page 64]
having seen it on my table while I resided at Mrs. Woodford's. The lock was remarkable, being engraved with Isabella's initials, and the motto gage d'amitie enamelled round them: it was a gift of friendship bestowed by Miss Hanbury, and far more valuable to me than all the treasure it could ever encompass.
Once more in possession of a small sum, I hastened to Mrs. Woodford's, in the hope of finding her, and of repaying my pecuniary obligation: but my disappointment was infinite, when the servant informed me that she still remained with Lady Kencarth; and that Miss Woodford had that evening set out to join them, intending to pass a few days with her sick relation. My good fortune, was still darkened by the gloom of regret, while I reflected on the evils that might again assail Mademoiselle de Beaumont: and fate seemed to whisper, that there
[Page 65]
was no prospect of repose for me, while there existed one wretched being in the whole circle of my acquaintance.
Mr. Optic being absent from home on my return to his house, I employed a vacant hour in collecting, and thus arranging my sentiments on the subject.
In this vain, busy world, where the good and the gay,
By affliction and folly wing moments away:
Where the false are respected, the virtuous betray'd,
Where vice lives in sunshine, and genius in shade;
With a soul-sicken'd sadness all changes I see,
For the world, the base world, has no pleasure for me,
In cities, where wealth loads the coffers of pride;
Where talents and sorrow are ever ally'd;
Where dulness is worship'd, and wisdom despis'd;
Where none but the empty and venal are priz'd:
All scenes, with disgust and abhorrence I see,
For the world has no corner of comfort for me!
While pale Asiatics, encircled with gold,
The sons of misfortune indignant behold,
While the tithe-pamper'd churchman reviles at the poor,
As the 'lorn sinking traveller faints at his door;
While religion dares sanction oppression's decree,
O! keep such hard bosoms, such monsters from me!
[Page 66]
While the flame of a patriot expires in the breast,
With ribbands and tinsel, and frippery drest;
While the proud mock the children of want and of care;
Give a sneer for each sigh, and a smile for each pray'r:
Though they triumph a day—a short day it must be:
Heaven keep such cold tyrants, O! keep them from me.
While the lawyer still lives by the anguish of hearts;
While he wrings the wrong'd bosom, and thrives as it smarts;
While he grasps the last guinea from poverty's heir;
While he revels in splendour which rose from despair;
While the tricks of his office our scourges must be,
Ah! keep the shrewd knave, and his quibbles from me.
O! Earth! thou vile Earth! how I tremble to trace
The anguish that hourly augments for thy race!
How I turn from the worst while I honour the best;
The enlighten'd adore; and the venal detest:
And alas! with what joy to the grave would I flee,
Since the world, the base world! has no pleasure for me!
[Page 67]
CHAP. LII. Two days had passed, when Mrs. Woodford and her daughter returned to town; I paid them a visit immediately on their arrival, and requested permission to arrange my pecuniary obligations: but Mrs. Woodford would not hear me mention the subject. She expressed herself as sufficiently gratified in having been of service to me; and commanded, if I valued her friendship, an eternal silence on the subject in future.
Amelia evidently laboured under an unconquerable depression of spirits; her cheek was pale, and her countenance the melancholy index of a mind heavily charged with affliction. Mrs. Woodford only quitted the room for a few minutes, during the evening; but those
[Page 68]
few afforded Amelia an opportunity of disclosing a world of anticipated sorrow. “Walsingham!” said she, with a quivering lip, and eyes suffused with tears, “in another week I shall be obliged to relinquish every hope of happiness—I shall be the wife of---” Here she suddenly paused: “but,” continued she, after a conflict of a few moments, “you must not witness my sacrifice; you must not behold the agony it will inflict, on a heart that would not be able to sustain the trial. I conjure you to see me no more. There are reasons which will render your absence necessary to my future peace of mind. I have this day received a letter, which decides my fate, and renders you the only being upon earth, from whom I must separate for ever!”
“Must separate!” repeated I; “who shall compel you?”
[Page 69]
“Reason, honour, gratitude, unite to command your absence,” replied Miss Woodford. The word gratitude stung my pride, and I briefly answered, “Your commands shall be obeyed.”
“Oh God!” exclaimed Amelia,” “what a moment is this? How shall I fulfil those solemn vows which custom and religion will compel me to make; but which my truant heart will every moment shrink from? Shall I, so attached, so compelled, be culpable, if I kneel at the altar with a bosom conscious of falsehood; and half resolved to hate the very object whom I there promise to love, to honour?”
I knew not how to answer her. Beautiful and interesting as she appeared at that moment, I could not offer her an honourable union; and I shuddered at the idea of destroying a gentle, fascinated girl, whose merit as far surpassed my pretensions, as her beauty did that of
[Page 70]
every other woman,—excepting Isabella. After waiting some time, and finding me silent, she continued: “The idol to whom you devote your thoughts, for whom you pass a life of weary anguish, is already married.”
“Married! Almighty God! Is Isabella married?” exclaimed I, with a voice of frantic despair.
“Pardon me, unhappy Walsingham,” continued Miss Woodford, “if I am the unwelcome messenger of the fatal secret; but the object of your attention at Mrs. Heartwell's, is the wife of Sir Sidney Aubrey. I have been indefatigable in my inquiries, and the result of them is the dreadful confirmation of your despair. Think of her no more.”
“Not think of her!” cried I, in an agony of frenzy; “I will think of her, and I will see her: she shall not triumph; her lover, her seducer, her---Oh! perdition seize the word! her husband ,
[Page 71]
shall not possess her long! Never, never will I rest till I have found them! While I had hope, there was yet a dawn of happiness in store for me: but the fiat of despair is conclusive, and one of us shall perish.”
“You will not find her,” said Amelia; “whither would you seek her?”
“Whither? In all her haunts of dissipation,” said I; “at every place of public entertainment. The crowds of cities and the solitudes of mountains shall be explored. Oh, Amelia! you know not how I loved her! how I doted on this vain, capricious, barbarous Isabella!” Mrs. Woodford interrupted the conversation, and in a few minutes I departed in a fever of mind little short of madness.
On the following morning I hired a lodging in Pall Mall;—I had been told that it was the fashionable resort of every morning lounger, who wished either to
[Page 72]
see or to be seen in the busy rendezvous of notoriety. It was my morning task to watch at my window; my evening occupation was that of traversing the streets, with the hope of seeing Sir Sidney's carriage waiting to convey them to some place of public amusement. Three days passed, and I was still unsuccessful;—but the fourth!—Oh, Rosanna! how shall I transcribe the page of cureless misery, which time has engraved upon my heart in characters indelible? How shall I unfold the events of that fatal period, in which I abjured every hope of happiness; every gleam of future consolation?
A second masquerade was announced at the Opera-house. The recollection that I had seen Isabella at Mrs. Heartwell's made me determine on going, in hopes that I should again meet the woman who was now almost an object of abhorrence, and more than ever the
[Page 73]
source of an hopeless attachment. Again a disguise was provided, and again I flew to the scene of folly and intrigue, armed with resentment, and impatient for an opportunity to vent the indignation of my full heart. There again I found the same phalanx of restless spirits that never cease to wander in the haunts of dissipation. Every one seemed dying with ennui , and no one either tried to amuse, or wished to be amused: languor, universal languor, pervaded the scene, excepting only here and there a busy couple arranging plans for future disgrace, and uttering ill-natured truths, under the specious disguise of wit or admonition. Many a fair sylph, who had recently been initiated in the mystic rites of the higher regions, here made her debut in the mazes of deception, or the flowery paths of modern gallantry, till the festoons of coloured lamps glimmered their last rays, and the morning came,
[Page 74]
to discover the weary group half asleep, half dressed, half dirty, and more than half dissatisfied with their night's entertainment.
On entering the crowd, I fancied that I saw and heard, at least, a dozen Isabellas. Every pretty figure, every soft voice, seemed to mark the object of my search. At length a female passed me, and with more than ordinary attention darted the lustre of her blue piercing eyes through the black screen which concealed every other feature. I stopped short; she turned round, and courteously kissed her hand. A female friend accompanied her; I followed them; attempted to enter into conversation; but the beautiful incognita was dumb;—not a word would she utter; and I began at last to grow impatient.
She seated herself at the supper table; whispered and laughed with her companion; offered me a glass of iced fruit,
[Page 75]
and again whispered. I now observed a mask who seated himself by her side,and by his address knew him to be Doctor Pimpernel. “Divine creature!” said he, “how celestially you look! I have been searching after you this half hour. My noble friend Lord Kencarth wants to present a young stranger to you; a fellow that is dying by G—d: he has watched you all the night, and wants to know who the mask was that persecuted you before supper?” The lady whispered. The doctor instantly fixed his eyes on me with inquisitive rudeness. I sat perfectly still, gratifying his curiosity, and secretly cherishing a new source of indignation, when two black dominos bowed to the fair unknown. The doctor rose, and with obsequious attention gave his place to one of them; while the other came round the table, and took his seat next to me.
[Page 76]
He gazed at me with an earnest and unceasing inquietude; and by his evidently restless manner, I concluded that he wished to quarrel. This intercourse of menacing looks continued for some time, when the stranger, in a feigned voice, addressed me.
“Why,” said he, “why do you follow that lady?”
“Because it amuses me,” answered I.
“Is she your mistress?”
I made no reply.
“Is she the woman of your heart?” said the inquisitive mask.
“She was—once, I believe,” answered I, with some hesitation.
“You believe!” repeated the inquirer; “are you not certain?”
“Not quite,” said I; “but if you know the lady, you can place the surmise beyond a doubt.”
[Page 77]
“Ridiculous!” cried the mask. “What right have you to persecute a stranger, upon mere surmise?”
“The right which you, assume when you ask the question,” said I. “But as I am not more disposed to listen to impertinence, than you are to cease offending, I think the most decisive way of settling the business, is for both of us to unmask.” At this instant I snatched the disguise from my face; the stranger was on the point of following my example, when he started back and sunk upon the bench behind him. Still he kept his mask on, and conjecture was more bewildered than ever; I knew that decorum would not admit of my touching it; and yet it was impossible for me to let the affair rest in doubt; or for the offender to escape with impunity, after his impertinent interference.
[Page 78]
The lady who had excited my curiosity and the jealousy of my unknown inquisitor, now rose to mingle with the dancers. The black domino and Doctor Pimpernel accompanied her; I started from my seat, and followed them. The doctor would have hustled me, but I still persevered—Again my arm was checked, and a voice which seemed familiar to me exclaimed—“By Heavens, Walsingham! you shall not follow her.”
I turned suddenly round, and the stranger unmasking, I discovered that it was my persecuting antagonist Sir Sidney Aubrey.
He stretched forth his hand with the most eager cordiality, accompanied by a smile, which seemed an additional insult.—My sensations were undescribable —Smarting with the keenest sense of injury, deceived, deserted, neglected, and robbed of every hope, I turned with disgust
[Page 79]
from a reconciliation which would have disgraced me, and left Sir Sidney the victorious husband of Isabella.—The idea was distracting—insupportable! I would have departed without making any answer to my cousin's strange injunction;—I wished not to seek a quarrel—I shuddered at the thought of shedding his blood, even though he had tortured my heart with the most inhuman persecutions. I paused—I struggled with the conflicts of my soul.
Sir Sidney's countenance was provokingly chearful.—“I am glad that we meet once more,” said he; “for I have an infinite page of time to unfold—full of events, and interesting to us both.”
Impertinent as I deemed his mirth, I still had sufficient command of myself to forbear offering him any insult. I was resolved not to sacrifice my life for an ungrateful woman—a deeper, sweeter
[Page 80]
vengeance occupied my mind;—vengeance, which I believed would render all the events of future days wholly indifferent. Had Sir Sidney annihilated me on the first hour that he entertained a passion for Isabella, there would have been a degree of mercy to grace his triumph: but he consigned my lacerated breast to months of lingering torture! —darkened my hopes of fame, my paths to fortune!—and, by his fatal machinations, undermined every affection of the heart, every source of peace and reputation!
I was again endeavouring to quit the theatre, when Sir Sidney caught my arm and exclaimed—“Gracious God! have you forgot me, Walsingham?”
“Would to heaven I had!” replied I, endeavouring to break from him.— “Let go my arm, Sir Sidney; do not propel my thoughts to mischief; there
[Page 81]
is danger in thus irritating an unquiet spirit; avoid it, if you value your existence.”
“How idly you talk, Walsingham,” cried Sir Sidney; “how little do you know my motives for that, which you deem persecution! You have sense, discernment, feeling!—you have faculties of mind that should place it above prejudice.”
I endeavoured to break from him: “By the immortal Powers, Sir Sidney!” exclaimed I, maddening with rage, “this insolence is not to be endured! This perpetual, this untiring tyranny will rouse me to resistance; and one of us will be the victim. Beware, I charge you to beware, how you provoke my vengeance! I have been long enough the slave of your determined cruelty;—the hour of retribution is at hand, and may the protection of Heaven
[Page 82]
forsake me if I do not well employ it.”
“Bravo!” cried Sir Sidney, giving me a smart tap upon the shoulder; “out with your rage!—let the storm have vent, and then we will talk reasonably.”
I smothered my frenzy, for I was little less than frantic—We returned to a table which was entirely deserted. Sir Sidney called for a bottle of champaign; I had already drunk too much, my blood was fevered, my brain burning with agony, my heart throbbing with resentment.
“Why, what a silly, hot-headed fellow art thou, my good cousin!” cried Sir Sidney, filling my glass, and laughing with provoking jocularity. “Where have you been since I saw you last?—in what corner of this great chaos of folly and dissipation have you concealed yourself, to cherish resentment, and to overwhelm your reason?”
[Page 83]
“Before you ask the question,” said I, “tell me Sir Sidney, why you have robbed me of repose?—why you seduced the affections of Isabella?—why you now set the world's opinion at defiance, and thus publicly expose the infamy of your triumph?”
“Because it pleases me,” replied Sir Sidney, with cool and irritating indifference. “Isabella is a pleasant girl, who wishes to travel; I am a social being, and want a companion.”
“And I a tame, disgraced, and abject fool!” said I, “to bear the insults that you every moment heap upon me!—Hear me, Sir Sidney.—You have from your earliest childhood been the bane of my repose; you have treated me unworthily, inhumanly! Every wish of my heart has been crossed and counteracted by your barbarous machinations. Born to supplant me, you have fully answered all the purposes of fate, and your rancour
[Page 84]
will never terminate till one of us shall fall. I speak not from the impulse of the moment: I have long ruminated on the tenor of your conduct; and despised myself for the baseness of submission. Had you not been created, I had been happy. The hour which gave you birth sealed my destiny with sorrow. Can I esteem, can I love the author of my misery? Have I, through the long and tedious path of life, cherished one hope, attached myself to one dear object, of which you have not deprived me? Ask your heart, and tell me the result of its confession.”
Sir Sidney seemed lost in thought.—I swallowed a large draught of intoxicating liquor—and waited with infinite self constraint for my cousin's answer.—He was silent, and I again addressed him—
“You have not even the slightest plea for your duplicity. I read the
[Page 85]
tacit confession of your soul in your involuntary silence! Why then sting my breast with perpetual scorpions?—why hunt me like a weary panting victim, and enjoy the agonies with which you wring my bosom in proportion as they become insupportable? It is my misfortune, my curse, to love Isabella!—yes, to love her amidst all her indiscretions, to pity the weakness of her nature, and to lament the capricious conduct which any being less devoted than myself would execrate.”
Sir Sidney's colour changed—he bit his lip—with a trembling hand raised the glass towards it, again placing it on the table—rested his head against a pillar near his seat, and seemed overpowered with agitation. He rose to leave me, but he had not strength to accomplish his purpose. The big drops started from his forehead—I fancied that his eyes were glazed with tears—he instantly
[Page 86]
concealed them. After an agonizing struggle, with quivering lips and a tone of inarticulate sorrow, he replied—
“Isabella is my friend—”
“Your mistress!” interrupted I.
“No! by the sacred powers of truth —by all that is dear to honour! she is not, she never shall be my mistress:—I love Isabella too well to see her degraded, even were it possible that she could consider me as a lover.”
“You know, Sir Sidney, that your vanity has long since told you Isabella would be, nay is, vain of such a lover.”
“How little do you know her!” cried Sir Sidney, with a forced and melancholy smile; “she loves me as a friend,—no more. We are united by the sacred bonds of sympathy—no mortal interference ever shall divide us: my honour will still be her safeguard—she is as innocent as an angel.”
[Page 87]
“Then resign her to me,” said I— “restore the peace of mind, of which you deprived me, when you robbed me of Isabella's society. Be generous; be the character you assume—trifle no longer with my happiness, my existence, but give me Isabella.”
“Never!” replied Sir Sidney. “I will willingly expire! but never while you breathe, Walsingham, shall you be the husband of Miss Hanbury. She has sworn to me, she has engaged herself by every sacred solemn oath, never to become your wife.”
“Barbarous, vindictive, vile, insulting coward!” said I.
Sir Sidney started from his seat. His face reddened to the deepest scarlet; then as suddenly became pale and distorted. “Walsingham,” said he, stifling his indignation, “do not disgrace me—do not stamp my name with infamy, or urge me on to my own eternal
[Page 88]
ruin. I was not organized to bear with passive submission such repeated insults. A time will come when your rash heart will ache at the recollection of your folly—mine will then be tranquil!”
“Let us decide the business quickly,” said I, following him from the table— “You must relinquish Isabella, or meet me to settle the dispute to-morrow.”
“Then I will meet you,” replied Sir Sidney; “for I would readily prefer death to the idea of beholding Miss Hanbury your wife. Rash and ungrateful Walsingham! you shall find me at the close of to-morrow evening near the river in Hyde-Park; from thence we can adjourn to some convenient spot, and end the contest finally: only remember, that my resolution is already fixed— my fate determined. Your future days will be devoted to misery, repentance, and despair!”
[Page 89]
I smiled at the implied menace, and we instantly parted.
At this moment again a tall and beautiful figure, dressed in a black gauze robe spangled with silver, darted by me. I followed her.—I caught her hand—I pressed it—she did not reprove the daring experiment.—I whispered, “Oh, Isabella! speak to me now, for to-morrow we shall part for ever!”
She shook her head and sighed. I held her hand—it trembled; she looked round, as if to join her company, and then entered the supper-room, which was empty. “Grant me yet a moment,” said I; “one little moment will not contaminate your love—my rival would not, at such a crisis, refuse so small a gleam of consolation.”
She seemed afflicted, but she remained masked, and silent. I pressed her hand to my parched lips; she gently tried to withdraw it, but it was a feeble effort; my
[Page 90]
tortured heart interpreted her want of power to sensibility,—dare I confess?—to something tenderer than pity! I was mad with transport. The sudden change from agony to joy possessed my faculties.—“Blessed Isabella!” said I, “dearest and most adored of women! it is the lost, distracted Walsingham that thanks thee even for this dawn of pity! withdraw it not! Perhaps it is destined to gleam upon my grave!”
She shuddered; I continued—
“Do you love Sir Sidney Aubrey? Tell me, Isabella; let me not expire in the dreadful uncertainty of that which bows me to destruction.”
She again shook her head. I no longer recollected our situation---the world was indifferent to me; I snatched her to my bosom—she threw me from her. I fell at her feet—“Forgive me, angel, Isabella! I am not in my senses—
[Page 91]
I shall offend no more. Soon, very soon, this aching heart will be cold and senseless!”
She turned suddenly from me, and flew towards the saloon: I followed till she reached the portico. She seemed bewildered, as though she had lost her party; a hackney coach at that moment drawing up, the door was opened, when, scarcely knowing what I did, I caught her in my arms, and, placing her by my side, ordered the coachman to drive on: he instantly obeyed. Overwhelmed with terror, and (forgive me, Rosanna, if I say) subdued by affection, she sunk upon my breast, and fainted.
My alarm was terrible: I concluded that, in the violence of my frenzy, I had struck her head against the carriage. I stopped the coachman, and bid him hasten to my lodgings in Pall-Mall. The door was opened by my servant. I informed him that the lady
[Page 92]
had fainted coming out of the Opera-House; he helped me to support her to the drawing-room, and, after bringing a glass of water, left us.
The inordinate quantity of wine which in my rage and vexation I had swallowed, soon took possession of my brain. I knew not where I was; the image of Isabella still predominated, while indignation and revenge occupied the throne of reason! I fetched the light which my servant had left upon the table to see whether her features began to reanimate: my limbs were unsteady—I reeled—the candlestick fell from my hand; while the faintest dawn of day entered between the shutters. I fell at the feet of my beautiful incognita .—She wept, and sighed; she hid her face upon my shoulder. The time, the place, the potency of the fatal draughts which I had swallowed, conspired to madden me! all the claims
[Page 93]
of unprotected innocence, all the laws of honour were violated—and—I was a villain!
CHAP. LIII. The sun rose; the busy world began to recommence its varying scenes of labour, and I, no longer yielding every sense to the stupor of intoxication, awoke to reason, to reflection, to abhorrence of myself. But, oh Heavens! Rosanna! what horrors undescribable seized on all my faculties! what misery, what despair presented themselves to my mind, when, almost driven to frenzy, and bathed in floods of tears, I beheld, —not Isabella—but the unfortunate Amelia!
[Page 94]
My anguish was complete! The only plea to palliate my crime, was retaliation for the capricious Isabella's conduct, and Sir Sidney's barbarous exultations.—That shadow of extenuation was now vanished. I had been the dupe of my own impetuous passions; the destruction of a weak, credulous, fond girl, whom I did not, could not love, but to whom I owed inestimable obligations.— Thus, adding to the misery of dishonour the stings of the most shameless ingratitude; at once a base and despicable fool, and a daring unprincipled libertine. I had been rash, imprudent, and unfortunate; but till this disastrous hour I had never been dishonourable. The tears, the complaints, the tender sorrows of my victim, only augmented my regret, without touching my sensibility. I was too wretched to know pity, too distracted to feel the throb of commiseration.
[Page 95]
All the sensations of my heart were absorbed in one vast and undescribable affliction; and the only idea that succeeded the first paroxysm of despair, was that of vengeance, decisive vengeance, on the arrogant Sir Sidney.
My situation was terrible! I knew of no asylum where I could shelter Amelia from the ills that threatened her; and to present her to the world as my avowed mistress would have been rashly, finally ruinous to her reputation. She avowed her determination never to return to that home which she had deserted; though the recollection of what her mother's mind would suffer, while labouring under the conflicts of suspence and doubt, presented more dreadful tortures than even the consciousness of her own destruction. She had from that fatal hour to solicit protection among strangers, or to try the painful experiment of seeking the balm of consolation from a smiling herd of specious
[Page 96]
summer friends, who bask in the sunshine of adversity, and, like the emigrating bird, fly at the approach of cold and chearless sorrow. The task which I had to perform, the difficult task of preserving a name from contempt which was sullied by indiscretion, puzzled and perplexed me, even if I survived the rencontre with Sir Sidney; and the idea of leaving her to the mercy of a sternly judging world, almost bewildered me to madness.
In the moment of calamity I had no alternative but that of placing Miss Woodford in a lodging near the metropolis; we instantly set out, and hired apartments at Kensington: she took possession of them the same evening as my sister, with the assumed name of Montagu.
I returned to town to meet Sir Sidney—You will judge of my situation—quitting an amiable object, who was the victim of her own susceptibility, yet
[Page 97]
whom I could not love; so lately subdued, and so soon deserted:—my conflicts were dreadful. I wished not to escape Sir Sidney's resentment; I had no prospect so sweet, so soothing, as that of death. To what misery, what, terrible extremes, will our ungovernable passions lead us!
I waited in Hyde Park more than an hour; twilight closed, and I saw nothing of Sir Sidney. At a loss to comprehend the meaning of his absence, for I did not consider cowardice as one of his imperfections, I continued to stroll up and down the footpath till night came on, when a little boy passed and repassed me with looks of doubt and curiosity. I inquired of him whether he had any message for me: he presented a letter, which he said a lady had given him near the Park gate in Piccadilly. I rewarded him for his trouble, and hastened to the turnpike, where I
[Page 98]
stopped to examine it. It contained the following words:
“Rash and unthinking Walsingham! —You know not what you meditate: Sir Sidney shall not meet you; a life so precious must not be sacrificed to a mad and persevering revenge, founded on mistaken principles of honour. Wait, I conjure you, wait with patience; and time will unravel the spell that now retards your prospects.
Isabella .”
I read the letter several times before I could believe my senses. I knew it to be the writing of Miss Hanbury, and I construed its contents a thousand different ways.—I hastened to Kensington. Amelia was in tears when I entered the apartment: I knew not what to say; hating myself for the thought of dissembling, and regarding her repose too
[Page 99]
tenderly to hazard a disclosure of my real situation. I remained with her till near midnight, tortured by compunction, and yet not daring to mortify her pride, by pleading intoxication as the cause of her dishonour; for to know that she was mistaken for another—that my frantic imagination presented the idea of Isabella at a time when reason was subservient to the frenzy of the moment—left her no hope of honourable retribution, no prospect of attachment, no ray of consolation.
I found upon inquiry, that Miss Woodford's visit to Mrs. O'Liffy, on the morning after the first masquerade, was prompted by curiosity to inquire the dress which was worn by the female who accompanied the Welsh baronet. Propelled by that undefinable impulse which some call fate, she resolved on assuming a similar disguise; in order to watch my actions, and if possible, under
[Page 100]
the outward form of Isabella, to obtain a full confession of my most secret wishes. Fatal was the result of her curiosity!—not only the ruin of her own reputation, but the eternal misery of a being fondly attached to her, and, by the most inestimable qualities of mind, deserving of a prouder destiny.
Miss Woodford scarcely spoke to me during the evening; the stupor of grief almost deprived her of the power of utterance. She frequently murmured her mother's name, and never without a torrent of tears, which at length softened my heart to sympathy and compunction; for I reflected, that the amiable object before me, in a few days, would have been the partner of an honourable union —the pride and ornament of domestic tranquillity.
The mistress of the house promised to shew Miss Woodford every attention. I presented her as an invalid;
[Page 101]
her pale countenance, her languid eyes, and her dejected looks, fully authorized the description. Every gentle reproof, every timid, yet mournful word she uttered, pierced my heart with self-reproach: yet even the disgrace, which her childish curiosity had brought upon her, did not so keenly agonize my breast, as the dreadful, the fatal necessity for that dissimulation which could alone preserve her from frenzy. For though I had destroyed the lustre of her days, I had no right to shorten them; though my passions had mastered my reason, they were not to subdue the claims of humanity.
Returned to London, after promising Amelia that she should see me early the following day, I hastened to my friend Optic, and without disguise unfolded the horrors of my situation. He shuddered:—the nice, the genuine sensibility of his mind, anticipated the vast
[Page 102]
variety of ills that would inevitable accrue from my frantic precipitation. “You must marry Amelia,” said he; “you must restore her to society, and thereby make her an honourable recompence for the present moment of despair.”
“Impossible!” said I.
“Seal not her destiny by any rash determination,” cried Mr. Optic. “Only I conjure you to reflect, that, in a few hours, the tongue of calumny may blast a name which you are bound to defend. The fondness and maternal ambition of Mrs. Woodford, the respectability of her connections, Amelia's blameless manners, and the censure of every honourable mind, will rise up in arms against you; and you will find no generous, manly heart, that will not condemn your conduct. For my own part,” continued he, with a severity of tone unlike any thing that I had heard
[Page 103]
in our former conversations, “I must, as the friend of Amelia Woodford, decidedly reprobate that levity, which, while it gratifies the passion of a libertine, destroys the repose of unprotected innocence. I am no cynic; but the plan which you have adopted sets all toleration at defiance.”
With this stern reproof he left me, more wretched and more at a loss how to act than I was even before I had requested his counsel on the subject.
Mr. Optic had scarcely quitted the room three minutes, when Doctor Pimpernel entered. He seemed disconcerted at seeing me, and I was no less confused at meeting the person from whose power I had so recently rescued the very woman whom I had since robbed of peace and reputation. The doctor soon released me from my embarrassment by vociferating—“My noble fellow! what induced you to write
[Page 104]
me such an absurd letter?—The poor little hussey was in better hands than she probably now is: for I suppose you have heard that she eloped last night from the Opera-house with nobody knows whom!—All the world talks of it; and the old woman is little less than mad;—mad by the immortal gods! as mad as—But no matter; the whole human race is more or less insane, and one old woman, in the great scale of events; is of little importance.”
“I am heartily sorry to hear that the world is so busily employed in propagating scandal,” said I; “but I am still more sincerely grieved, that there is occasion for their industry in the present instance.”
My voice faultered, and my mind was agonized to a degree that was scarcely supportable.
“She was a fool to elope,” continued the doctor. “A few days
[Page 105]
would have given her full liberty to indulge her propensities, without the peril of public disgrace; for, if I am rightly informed, the little blockhead was to have been married. The old duke, and half a dozen more on the lift of her inamoratos, waited impatiently for the event.—Well.”
“Do you suppose that an intrigue would have followed an honourable union with such rapidity?” said I.
“Unquestionably,” replied the doctor. “Amelia was too highly bred not to assert her claim to a diploma in the temple of gallantry. She has killed long enough; it is time that she should begin to cure. Apropos —I have been calling on half the divine creatures at the west end of the town; nothing talked of but the elopement. I looked in upon the Duchess of Riversford;— she, knowing the case to be natural, was not at all surprised at it. Lady
[Page 106]
Ethiop wondered how a man could be such a fool as to elope with such a young hoyden; Mrs. Winkwell stared more than usual; Lady Fubsy blushed deep purple at the profligacy of the rising generation; Miss Casino giggled; and Lady Amaranth was the only woman in the circle who did not change countenance.”
Poor Amelia! thought I, these were thy friends, thy associates. Where shall I hide thee from their barbarous triumphs?—My mind was wrapt in thought, when the doctor continued:—“I must go and tell the old duke; his joy will be excessive. The saucy baggage has long resisted his solicitations; even a carte blanche , and the villa at Hampton, could not tempt her: but the frozen heart once thawed, the broad sun of reason will soon expand its philanthropy. Well—I must make a memorandum to call on Doleful—got him
[Page 107]
a subscriber—but he must immortalize my name for it; or the slave shall be blotted from the lift of Heaven's own nobility. Poor Dole! he is but a blockhead after all;—he too is going to do a foolish thing, and to marry, because a little jade has fallen in love with him. Never, my noble Montagu! never, while you live, think of that enemy to universal liberty—that d—d despot Hymen! He has shackled more fools than all the tyrants in Christendom. But universal freedom is dawning on the sphere of human understanding, and man will fly, even to the very stars. Were you at the masquerade last night?”
“I was,” answered I.
“What an assemblage of beauty!” exclaimed the doctor. “I thought that I was in Mahomet's paradise!—Went home and supped with the pretty jade Amoret, and her comical friend Mrs. O'Liffy. Both confoundedly ancient!
[Page 108]
Well—no matter—drank tokay and claret out of the first cellar in town!—delicious—sublime—fit for the gods!—Where were you? I wanted to introduce you to little Amoret.”
“Was it Miss Amoret to whom you were talking at the supper-table?” said I.
The doctor rubbed his forehead. “O no, no,” answered he, after a moment's recollection, “that was Mrs. Winkwell: she hopped off with my noble friend Kencarth;—presented him to her for the first time—like each other wonderfully—‘live and love’—so says the old song. The fine animals were invented to smooth the rugged paths of fate. What say you, my Hercules?”
“They were created to be our first and best consolation,” said I; “but we are fools, and know not how to value them.”
“Send the whole race to me,” cried the doctor, “and I'll tell you what
[Page 109]
they are worth, from fourteen to five-and-thirty:—all beyond that age should die. But man! the grand creature man! should live for ever!—A man at the age of sixty is in the glowing zenith of mental and corporeal beauty!”
I smiled.
“You are sceptical,” cried the doctor.
“I cannot hesitate to credit an opinion which is founded on experience,” said I; “though Heaven knows, I shall never live to corroborate the assertion.”
The doctor started.
“Live!” vociferated he. “Now I think of it, I left an old woman dying! —must take another peep at her;— devilish rich. Well—Wish I knew where to find Amelia—arrogant little jade!—Want to give her some good advice;—find her out, my noble fellow! How goes your fever?—Brain cool— pulse low—head quiet. Well.”
[Page 110]
The doctor now bustled off, and I set out to visit my disconsolate victim.
CHAP. LIV. I found Miss Woodford in the deepest affliction: the sacrifice she had made, and the consciousness of what her parent would suffer, preyed upon her sensible mind, and almost reduced it to insanity. She conjured me to reflect on the misery to which I had exposed her; and to decide quickly on the plan of my future intentions. I knew not how to meliorate her fate: I ought to have married her; but there was mercy in refusing; for while she had a claim upon my gratitude, while her sorrows awakened the tenderness of pity, she was sure of my attentions; but had I once made her
[Page 111]
an honourable recompence, our mutual misery would have been the inevitable consequence; with all the hideous train of reproach, indifference, repentance, and disgust.
The agonizing regret I experienced, when memory presented that fatal moment which gave Amelia to my ungovernable revenge, rendered every other species of calamity trifling; and there was no pang, which fortune could inflict, that I could not have borne with patience, to have restored that purity of reputation which her folly and my inebriety conspired to tarnish. She was, in fact, the victim of her own fatal curiosity; on the eve of a marriage which her heart abhorred, and too tenderly prejudiced in favour of one who was unworthy of her affection, she became almost a voluntary sacrifice. I do not hope to extenuate my conduct; I do not seek to stigmatize Amelia;—yet
[Page 112]
reflection sometimes sooths me with the conviction, that we were equally culpable.
I continued to visit Miss Woodford as my sister; to console her affliction by the most unremitting attentions; and to provide every worldly comfort, as far as my slender fortune afforded the means; but no art, no persuasion could soften the acute sufferings of mental torture; no outward shew of pleasure compensate for the agony of self-reproof, no kind or soothing solicitude restore that jewel, reputation, which I had robbed her of; and which was doubly valuable where fortune dealt her favours with a sparing hand.
We had passed four days in our retreat, when calling at the Mount coffee-house to know if there were any letters for me, I found a note from Colonel Aubrey, informing me that he was in town for a few hours only: that he was
[Page 113]
to sail for Gibraltar in two days, Lord Linbourne's death rendering his departure absolutely necessary. I hastened to his lodgings. I found him strangely altered; his countenance was sorrowful, his cheek pale, his form wasted, and his manner dejected. He embraced me with the affection of a father: I shrunk upon a chair before him.
“Lord Linbourne has at length paid the forfeit of his indiscretion,” said Colonel Aubrey, “and my hand is stained with the life-blood of a fellow-creature! The reflection is terrible!” He shuddered, and walked hastily about the room. I had not power to address him. The recollection that he had been guilty of tolerated murder, in my defence, wrung my heart with the keenest reproaches. After a short pause, he resumed the conversation he had begun:
“Walsingham,” said he, “I know the sensibility of your mind; and I requested
[Page 114]
this interview to assure you, that I do not condemn any part of your conduct respecting Lord Linbourne. I was, indeed, to blame, for introducing an inexperienced boy into the society of such infernal harpies! My friendship for you is therefore undiminished.”
I thanked Colonel Aubrey for his unbounded generosity: yet, conscious that I had been the cause of a rencontre which had terminated so fatally, I felt the keenest anguish mingled with the most lively gratitude. He was visibly concerned to observe my depression of spirits, and with the most afflicting kindness entreated me to think no more of the adventure: “Lord Linbourne,” said he, “was an unworthy wretch, and little deserves the pity of a moment. Indeed, terrible as his death appears, it was scarcely to be accounted painful, when compared with the pangs which I have since suffered. But time is precious
[Page 115]
at this moment. I have business of importance to transact with my agent, and if you will dine with me at five o'clock, we will arrange every thing for our last separation, or our immediate departure.”
I took my leave, and hastened back to Amelia. The few hours between my interview with Colonel Aubrey and the time appointed for dinner, I resolved to pass in breaking my wish to her, and in sounding her mind respecting my voyage to Gibraltar. She met me with smiles of complacency, which rendered the task I had to perform doubly painful; for the pleasure which I felt in seeing her a degree less melancholy, made me unwilling to snatch the faint gleam of peace from her bosom, and again to whelm her with a new torrent of affliction.
After various subjects of conversation, I ventured to mention the propensity which I had ever felt for a military life:
[Page 116]
I told her that it had been my earliest wish, and my long cherished hope, that I should either end my days, or attain some share of distinction, on the field of warfare. She sighed, and remained silent; but her features, by their instantaneous change, gave proof of her bosom's apprehension. Still—I continued:
“Neither the favourite of fame nor of fortune; alas! Amelia, what can I bring you but a frail and sorrowing heart? How can I recompense you for all the anguish you now suffer, situated as I am, poor, abandoned by my relations, in hourly dread of a dreary captivity, and with affections irrevocably—”
“Devoted to another,” interrupted Miss Woodford, bursting into tears.
“Even so!” said I. “To dissemble now, would be more than blameable; it would be inhuman. You have my esteem,—my friendship,—my gratitude. The dreadful moment of intoxication
[Page 117]
which overturned my reason, did not render you less amiable, less virtuous! The culpability was mine:—yours, Amelia, the too credulous, too partial weakness of a misplaced attachment. Consider me henceforth as a dear brother. Return to your afflicted parent, and endeavour to forget that hour, the remembrance of which will scatter eternal poisons on your pillow.”
“Must I forget you, Walsingham?” said Amelia, with a look that penetrated my heart: “Must I abjure every cherished prospect of happiness, and return to my melancholy home, like a wretched penitent? Suffer me to be the partner of your enterprise:—I can bear the fatigues of a soldier's wandering life: I can even disguise my sex, to be the partaker of your peril. The heart which can really love, is superior to apprehension. Try my courage;—prove my affection!—you cannot—you will not
[Page 118]
refuse me the gratification of being your companion.”
The softness of her voice,—the contrasting energy of her expressions,—the consciousness of my own unworthy conduct,—conspired to check my tongue, and I continued stroaming about the room like one that was bewildered. Amelia's tears roused me from the deep and mournful reverie, “You cannot,” said I, “generous Amelia, indeed you cannot be the partner of my voyage. I shall have to cross the wide and fickle ocean,—to dare the perils of that boisterous element, whose storms would terrify, and perhaps destroy you. Besides, my gentle friend,” continued I, taking her trembling hand, “the accommodations of a fortress will but ill suit your tender nature. My duty, as a young soldier, would consign you to almost a perpetual solitude. You would look back with regret to the gay and splendid
[Page 119]
world; you would sigh, in vain, for the paths you had deserted.”
“Heavens! how little do you know the female heart!” exclaimed Miss Woodford: “How falsely, how injuriously do you pass sentence on the purest and most unconquerable attachment. Ungenerous Walsingham! I will not sue for consolation: I will endeavour to exert my fortitude; to relinquish every weak and fondly treasured hope; to resent your injustice, and to banish you from my rejected heart for ever. You shall behold how strongly reason can fortify the soul, when love no longer undermines its faculties. You shall hourly witness my returning peace of mind, my tranquil scenes of pure domestic happiness; and tremble, ungrateful Walsingham! while I demand, instead of childish empty adoration, respect, esteem, and gratitude, as the wife of Colonel Aubrey!”
I reeled, and fell.
[Page 120]
“Yes, Walsingham,” cried Amelia: “Colonel Aubrey was that lover, that generous, brave, neglected lover, to whom my hand was promised. I will instantly seek him: I will throw myself at his feet; confess my weakness, and your ungenerous triumph! If he will pardon an offending suppliant, my whole life shall be devoted to the promotion of his happiness;—days, months, and years of duty and esteem; of faithful friendship, —undivided attention, and domestic virtue; —all, all shall be Colonel Aubrey's. We will cross that perilous ocean; we will brave the hardships of a sea-encircled fortress; we will mock the storms of fate, and quit the busy splendid scenes of life, for ever.”
With difficulty I raised myself from the ground, and darted towards the door. Amelia would have held me;—my features were wild and terrible;—she shrieked;—she clasped me in her trembling
[Page 121]
arms:—I tore myself from her; —and, like a bewildered maniac, flew towards London, in search of Colonel Aubrey.
CHAP. LV. I pursued my course, talking to myself incoherently, looking like one distracted, and totally disregarding the foot passengers, who made way for me with pity and astonishment. Entering Hydepark corner, I met Mrs. Woodford. I shrunk almost to the earth, and passed her unobserved:—she was in Mrs. O'Liffy's carriage, and they were driving furiously towards Knightsbridge. I had not proceeded fifty yards, when two men, directed by the Duke of Heartwing's insolent servant, seized me; a crowd assembled; the circumstance of my having been advertised, with so large
[Page 122]
a reward for apprehending me, convinced the inquisitive spectators (for an English populace is easily taught to believe any thing) that I was a notorious offender. The state of my mind precluding the possibility of making any rational defence, I was hustled into an hackney coach; and, followed by a long train of the idle and the curious, conveyed to a justice of the peace for further examination.
The justice not knowing how to proceed on so singular a case, and being newly invested with the dignities of his office, ordered me to be placed in safe custody, at the house of a sheriff's officer. The idea of confinement at so critical a moment, when Amelia was left wholly unprotected, and Colonel Aubrey on the eve of departure, added to the anticipated horrors of a long captivity, and the loss of the opportunity which presented itself, of quitting England
[Page 123]
for ever, overwhelmed me with affliction.
Arrived in Carey-street, and once more a prisoner, I began to summon my recollection, and to devise the most probable means for my speedy emancipation, when the master of the house paid me a visit. The melancholy prospects which imagination had conjured up, seemed to assume a new and softer colour on the appearance of Mr. Rightly. His liberal mind and suavity of manners would have poured consolation on my sorrows, had they been of less magnitude in mental pangs, as well as the severities of fortune. He however entreated me to consider my temporary confinement as a mere form of law, which should under his roof bring with it neither terror nor extortion. The benevolence and liberality which distinguished his character from the herd of barbarians, who undertake the office of
[Page 124]
tormenting their fellow-creatures, made me lament that he was not placed in that sphere, which his merit would have honoured; at the same time, I considered it as a great benefit to the world in general, that there existed one man who could execute the rigours of the law, with that mildness and humanity which divested them of more than half their severity.
The attorney who had issued the writ against Mr. Randolph, was gone to his villa, at some distance from the metropolis. His clerks could not give any satisfactory information, and I was obliged to remain that night at Mr. Rightly's. My anxiety was scarcely supportable. As time moved tardily, the fever of my mind increased. It was in vain that I listened to the voice of consolation; no power of pity could draw my attention from the sombre phantoms that encompassed me on all sides. All Mr. Rightly's
[Page 125]
humanity, all his disinterested civilities, could not extract the thorn of self-reproach which sunk deeply in my heart. As the hours advanced, my agony increased, till the anguish of my mind burst forth in all the wildness of despair; and before midnight I was perfectly frantic.
I dispatched a messenger for my philanthropic friend Mr. Optic. He quitted his bed to obey the summons of distress, and in less than an hour I was in some degree consoled by his appearance. I unfolded all the secrets of my heart. I knew, that in the bosom of honour and sensibility, I might deposit them with safety. Again Mr. Optic strongly urged the propriety of my marrying Miss Woodford:—he represented the miseries which were likely to assail her, unless I could make up my mind to the only compensation which remained for me to offer. I shuddered at the idea. The frailty which had rendered her my
[Page 126]
victim, made me suspect that she would scarcely fulfil, with honour, the duties of a wife. She had sacrificed a man who was her betrothed husband; and I had not the vanity to suppose, that she would respect that name, merely because it was sanctioned by the ceremonies of a priest. This may not be the doctrine of morality, but it is the reasoning of nature.
We sat the whole night, talking on the subject; and soon after day-break Mr. Optic, by his own request, set out for Kensington, to assure Amelia of my safety, and to tranquillize her mind with the consolations of friendship. I also wrote a few lines, earnestly conjuring her not to see Colonel Aubrey till my emancipation. My sorrows now became so complicated, that I scarcely knew which event formed the main spring of action on my senses. Pity, compunction, resentment, pride, and—affection, combined to torture me; each for a time
[Page 127]
predominating, and again in its turn yielding to the encroachment of a new torment.
Before noon Mr. Optic returned. On his entering the room, I read in his countenance the sensations of his mind. He threw himself into a chair, and without uttering a syllable, opened, by his looks, a volume of despair. Every artery in my feverish frame was convulsed with anticipated horrors. After a violent struggle between impatience and apprehension, I had just resolution to articulate, “I trust she yet lives?”
Mr. Optic replied, “She lives; but in so pitiable a state, that it would be happiness to die! Her agony of mind has nearly deprived her of reason, and she was, just before my arrival at her lodgings, conveyed to her mother's house completely wretched. I had not courage to behold her in such a state of ruin. I
[Page 128]
have too often admired her, in the lustre of her beauty, when health and innocence diffused a smile over her features, to contemplate the desolation of both, and still profess myself the friend of Mr. Ainsforth.”
I shrunk almost to the ground. “Almighty God!” exclaimed I, “where will my sorrows end? Oh, my friend!” continued I, addressing Mr. Optic, “for I will not suffer you to relinquish that title; advise me, tell me how I ought to act; devise some means to rescue this unhappy girl from the anguish of despair.”
“I have already pointed out the only step you ought to take,” replied Mr. Optic with a serious and impressive tone that penetrated my heart: “there is yet time to render justice; and, whatever enlightened philosophy may inculcate, as long as the forms of moral virtue retain
[Page 129]
the power of supporting the decencies of life, it is our duty to adopt them.”
“I cannot love Amelia; I can esteem, admire, and respect her mental virtues,” said I.
“By making her your wife, you will not diminish their claims to admiration, and you will procure for her that protection from the world, which will in some measure compensate for the loss of your affection,” replied Mr. Optic: “she will then enjoy some small portion of repose. As your mistress,—neither valued by society nor beloved by you,—existence will be insupportable.”
“I will endeavour to adopt your opinions,” said I; “feeling their propriety,—I will—if possible—become a convert to the cause of honour,—though at the expence of all my hopes and all my affections.”
[Page 130]
I had scarcely uttered these words, when Colonel Aubrey's name was announced. Mr. Optic took his leave, and I endeavoured to summon all my fortitude for the agonizing interview.
CHAP. LVI. Colonel Aubrey's sorrow at beholding me in captivity for some moments prevented his speaking. I too was silent, but from another cause;—destined to meet the man whose hands I had stained with blood; whose friendship I had so little merited; whose peace of mind I had destroyed for ever; my torture was infinite! I dreaded to expose Amelia's name to the prying eye of censure; and yet I knew not how to preserve
[Page 131]
her reputation, without the most infamous hypocrisy towards my patron, my friend! that generous, brave, and liberal friend, who, when the world forsook, adopted me! who espoused my cause at the peril of his life; and voluntarily offered me the means of future happiness, when despair had threatened to be my only companion!
No culprit at the bar of condemnation ever looked more wretchedly self-convicted than I did, at the moment of Colonel Aubrey's entering the apartment. My blood seemed to rush through every vein with more than ordinary circulation; my heart throbbed with a sensation of cowardice, which till that moment it had never experienced; my eyes were bent upon the ground; my limbs scarcely able to sustain me. The only wish of my agitated soul, was that of instant annihilation. Colonel Aubrey grasped my hand, as he shook it with
[Page 132]
the most hearty affection. I could not return the friendly pressure;—the remembrance of my unworthiness benumbed every fibre in my exhausted frame, till I fell on his shoulder, and groaned with agonizing conflicts.
“What possesses thee, boy?” cried Colonel Aubrey, shaking my arm, as if to rouse my recollection. “Art thou frantic? Though I lament Lord Linbourne's fate, I must not forget that I am a man. This inordinate grief is childish: a soldier's bosom should be steeled against the tenderness of pity. Your intercourse with the refined part of society has enervated your mind;— resist—resist, or you will not do honour to the profession which, I trust, you mean to adopt in future.”
“I was not created to resist,” answered I, sternly desperate: “had the power of self-denial been given me; had not my mind been contaminated
[Page 133]
by early prejudices, arising from disappointed hopes, perhaps I had been worthy of your friendship: as it is, we must separate finally. I deserve nothing from your nice sense of honour—but vengeance or contempt. Take, I conjure you, take the former; and rid me of a being, that is now insupportable.”
Colonel Aubrey smiled.—“I would not hurt thee, boy,” said he; “I would not inflict a pang on thy heart, to be master of the universe. But I am a veteran in the service of love, as well as war; I can guess the cause of this strange repugnance: you wish to evade a promise which was a mere subterfuge from greater evils. You now look forward to brighter prospects:—some darling object occasions your apostacy, and you are too warm an idolater to prefer the turmoil of the camp, to the enchantments of beauty.”
[Page 134]
“You know not what I feel,” said I, pacing hastily to and fro along the apartment.
“There you are deceived,” replied Colonel Aubrey. “At the moment that I offer counsel, I am myself in want of consolation. Alas! Walsingham, the sternest outside may conceal the tenderest heart. Sensibility depends not on the pursuits of life: many a rough and bleeding soldier, when the din of battle ceases, sighs for a beloved object, and, for her sake, feels a pang which his wounds would not have inflicted. God knows,” continued he, shuddering, “I would rather have faced a cannon-ball than have met the misery which I now experience.”
As he spoke, for the first time in my life, I observed a tear rolling heavily down his manly cheek, while his folded arms, and drooping head, seemed the emblems of unconquerable sorrow.
[Page 135]
After a silence of some minutes, with a deep sigh, he resumed the conversation.
“Walsingham,” said he; with painful hesitation, “you remember my journey to Glenowen?”
I bowed assent, for I had not power to speak.
“You must also recollect the circumstance of my borrowing money from Lady Aubrey?—It was my intention to have bestowed that small sum as a marriage settlement upon a young person whom it has been, for a considerable time, my misfortune to idolize.” —His voice faultered.—“Fie on this unmanly sensibility!” cried he. “I am ashamed—I am, indeed, ashamed of my weakness!—But this is no time for trifling; I will therefore be explicit. The pleasing chimeras of fancy are for ever vanished, the hopes, which the virtues of one, whom I thought perfect, first taught me to cherish, are now
[Page 136]
eternally destroyed. Oh! Walsingham, had you known the angel I adored, you would not have wondered at my fondness. Yet, what had I to hope?—the inequality of our years was alone sufficient to convince me of my error. The money which I borrowed of Lady Aubrey will now be useless: I have no debts, but such as I can easily discharge; no expences, but those which a soldier's pay will more than provide for. Accept then, my worthy, but ill-treated friend—accept the paltry sum, and marry Isabella.”
“Isabella!—Is not Isabella the defined wife of Sir Sidney Aubrey?” said I, starting, and ready to sink on the ground before him.
“Sir Sidney is not the destined husband of Miss Hanbury, believe me,” replied Colonel Aubrey; “nay more, he never means to bear that title. Not three hours ago he assured me, upon
[Page 137]
his most sacred word of honour, that he entertained no thoughts of making her his wife; that though, for private reasons, she passed for such, she was innocent of the smallest indiscretion, and that his mind and soul were strongly, irrevocably, devoted to an object, far, very far different from Isabella.”
“Would to Heaven I had known this but ten days sooner!” said I; “the intelligence comes too late to snatch me from despair. That evil power which has prevailed over every hope of happiness since my weary eyes first saw the light—that infernal demon, whose machinations taught me to hate Sir Sidney —who drove me from my native home —estranged me from the solitudes of peace—and now taunts me with a retrospect of bliss which can no more return—will never quit his victim, till frenzy, or the grave, shall close the scene of persecution.”
[Page 138]
“Yet have a little patience,” cried Colonel Aubrey. “I will bear your wishes to Isabella; I will be your advocate: all that has passed shall be forgotten; and if I see you and the object of your choice happily united, I shall return to Gibraltar one degree less sad than I should be if I left you wretched; for my own repose is vanished, my treasured store of hopes wrested from me by a base and dastardly destroyer, who envied my few remaining days of joy, and robbed me, treacherously robbed me, of the woman I adored.”
I rose, and was hastening towards the door. My thoughts were wild—my determinations desperate!—Colonel Aubrey caught hold of my arm and detained me. “Yet one word more,” said he, “and I have done. I also beg that you will accept a commission in my regiment, with leave to join us in six or twelve months, whichever shall
[Page 139]
be most agreeable to yourself and Isabella.”
“Have a care!” said I wildly. “You know not what you say!—on whom you heap such agonizing kindness!—you are not sensible that I am---”
“What?” cried Colonel Aubrey, changing colour, and alarmed by my frenzied manner.
“The ruin of your peace!—the infernal fiend, whom hell has chosen for your evil genius!—the mad, impetuous fool who urged your hand to shed the blood of Lord Linbourne!—and, to fill up the horrible account of crimes, the destroyer of Amelia!”
Colonel Aubrey reeled back a few paces, and fell. I snatched up his sword, which he had laid on the table, and, darting out of the room, flew towards my chamber.
[Page 140]
CHAP. LVII. I was hastening towards the apartment where I slept, and uttering a variety of frantic ejaculations, when I met Mr. Rightly, who, judging by my looks that I meditated mischief, stopped, and disarmed me. The task was not difficult; for sorrow, blended with compunction, so completely enervated my whole frame, that an infant might have overpowered me. I knew not what to do:—the distress which Colonel Aubrey evidently laboured under, and of which my precipitate conduct had been the original cause, was, with all its poignancy, trifling in comparison with what I at that moment suffered. Not only the miseries of my best and most generous friend, but the destruction of an innocent and amiable girl, pressed heavily
[Page 141]
on my conscience. What was to be done under this accumulation of distress?—I had no remedy but in an act of desperation, no hope of tranquillity but in the grave.
Colonel Aubrey, after a short struggle between resentment and pity, quitted the house. I now had leisure and solitude to indulge my mournful ruminations, and the retrospect which they presented was terrible in the extreme: The friend on whose liberal mind I could have relied for the consolations of reason, was, by my rash actions, and no less imprudent avowal of them, estranged from me for ever. I had, after all the kindness which he had shewn me, after the voluntary protection and regard which his liberal heart had bestowed, not only embrued his hands in blood, but wrung his bosom with the most undescribable tortures. I had, towards Mrs. Woodford, acted no less unworthily:
[Page 142]
she, whose house had been my sanctuary, my safe and honourable asylum, when I was charged with crimes, branded with infamy—even she had not escaped the anguish of repentance, for having fostered in the bosom of friendship that being who was destined to rob her only child of honour and repose. Poor Amelia! thy sensibility, thy disinterested affection, were the bane of all that is dear to reputation, or sacred to hospitality!—Had I never been received as the inmate of thy abode, thou hadst yet been pure and happy. Thy virtues were thy destroyers; for the strong resemblance which they bore to those which once embellished the mind of Isabella, not only bewildered my senses, but laid the foundation for every future sorrow.
As soon as Colonel Aubrey was gone, I wrote a letter to Mrs. Woodford, proposing to make Amelia every
[Page 143]
honourable recompence in my power, and conjuring her to allow me an interview, in order that we might settle preliminaries for that purpose. I had sealed the proposal, and was directing it, when the following laconic note arrived from Colonel Aubrey:
“If the object of my affection has been basely seduced, if her honour has been sacrificed to your artifice, I can yet pardon her deviation from chastity; I can yet receive the deluded girl to my fond, foolish heart. But if, on the contrary, you are the object of her choice—I expect that you rescue her from infamy, and bestow on her that title to which she has a claim by all the laws of rectitude and humanity. Send me a brief and candid answer; for there is no time to trifle, where a woman's reputation and happiness are in imminent danger. The world may condemn
[Page 144]
me; but I shall feel a more delightful gratification in snatching an amiable object from the insults of the world, than ever the libertine experienced in seducing innocence from the paths of virtue.”
I read the letter over and over, and every time with augmented veneration for the character of that man, whose affection set the voice of calumny at defiance, and whose sensibility could pity the frailty of a beloved object, at the same moment that his humanity rescued her from despair. After a variety of reflections—an infinity of pain, —I snatched up my pen, and, with a trembling hand, hastily wrote this answer:
“Amelia is the most amiable of women!—her virtues cannot be tarnished by her deviation from chastity. She was the victim of an innocent deception—
[Page 145]
I, an involuntary seducer. If you can summon resolution to brave the malice of the world, you will find every pure and transcendent qualification still embellishing the gentle, the unfortunate object of your generous attachment. As past events preclude the possibility of our ever meeting in future, accept my most grateful acknowledgments for friendship that has been unbounded, and endeavour to forget that a being exists, whose perverse fortune has rendered you so vile a recompence.”
The letter being dispatched, I again indulged the ruminations of despair. The idea of self-destruction, which had frequently predominated in my mind in moments of calamity, now seemed to acquire a decisive victory over all the suggestions of fortitude and reason. I ventured to doubt the criminality of the deed, and the being, who in matters of moral tendency can once become
[Page 146]
a sceptic, will not hesitate in time to avow himself a decided apostate. The world had no prospect of happiness for me; Fortune frowned upon my hopes, and Nature shuddered while reflection pointed out the temptations with which the proud, yet feeling heart, is environed in the dreary paths of adversity. Born to destroy the peace of every being whose affection fostered me, I had only one step to take, if I continued to exist, which was to fly from society, and to become a voluntary recluse, a solitary misanthropist.
Mr. Rightly endeavoured to sooth my mind by promises of every service that his power could render me. The lawyer, whom Mr. Randolph's creditor had employed, was still engaged with a party on a pleasurable excursion; and, till his return to the paths of professional duty, I was under the necessity of remaining a prisoner. Mrs. Rightly was
[Page 147]
a polite and amiable woman: I was indulged with an apartment at their private house, and, on my parole d'honneur , became one of the family. My chagrin, notwithstanding all this marked indulgence, was not to be overcome. I gave way to the most incessant and mournful meditation, till, by losing both sleep and appetite, I was confined to my chamber, and in extreme danger.
The politeness and liberality with which I was treated, secured my person more effectually than the heaviest bolts, or the closest doubly-grated windows of the strongest prison. From these I should probably have meditated an escape, but Mr. Rightly held me by the spell of confidence—the magic of gratitude—which, to an honourable mind, is the most powerful of all enchantments. I passed my time in the society of a worthy man, and an excellent, charming woman, till sickness overwhelmed
[Page 148]
me; even then their attentions did not diminish; for that which was originally the effect of good-nature and politeness, now became the genuine exertion of the purest humanity.
I lingered several days, before my illness began to abate in the smallest degree: when the violence of the fever had exhausted itself, a circumstance occurred which gave a new aspect to my situation —This was no other than an unexpected and happy reverse in Mr. Randolph's finances. News had arrived that his West-India sugar and cotton plantations had yielded an uncommonly rich crop; and, in addition to this liberal gift of Nature, Fortune had bestowed on him a prize of ten thousand pounds in the State Lottery. The letter which Mr. Rightly had written to the attorney had been unopened till it was sent with one from Mr. Randolph into the country— the latter contained a draft to the amount
[Page 149]
for which he had originally been arrested; with earnest injunctions to discover my retreat, and to procure my immediate emancipation, whatever the sum might be for which I was in custody. With some management, and the friendly assistance of Mr. Rightly, the action for an escape was compromised—the plaintiff, being a man in reduced circumstances, but sufficiently acquainted with the world to know, that the persecutor who wins at a game of law is generally a loser; while his vanquished antagonist, though completely ruined, can laugh at the victor, at the same moment that he smarts from his malevolence.
Having once more obtained the first of human blessings, liberty, I engaged a place in a stage-coach, and in the afternoon set out for Bristol. My health was so much impaired by sickness and by sorrow, that change of air and the consolations of friendship were absolutely
[Page 150]
necessary for its restoration. It is impossible to describe my sensations during the first fifty miles of my long journey. —Amelia's sufferings,—Isabella's mysterious conduct,—and Colonel Aubrey's just displeasure, agonized my mind, and rendered me insensible to all other objects; till an event, as dangerous as it was common, roused me from the lethargy of sorrow, and, for a short period, diverted my melancholy from its long and deep course of gloomy meditation.
Within a few miles of Marlborough, the coachman stopped to water his horses at a small public-house by the road-side.—He quitted his box, after ordering a bowl of hot rum and water, and with the most inconsiderate composure entered the house. The passengers, three beside myself, waited with fear and impatience a considerable time; till one of them, whom Sterne would have denominated
[Page 151]
a discontented traveller, after damning all stage-coaches, and declaring that more lives were lost, and more horses destroyed by them, than by all other sources of casualty, began to call loudly for the thoughtless guide—but his voice was unregarded; for we saw the coachman, through the kitchen window, contentedly seated by the fire-side, and enjoying his bowl with invincible composure.
The irritated traveller every moment grew more and more inclined to remonstrate; he bawled and swore, and in the most violent invectives reprobated the atrocity of that conduct, which exposed the lives of four persons to such imminent danger.—The coachman paid little or no attention to his complaints, till rage got the better of prudence, and he became the angry traveller. The door was thrown open with furious impetuosity, and without waiting for letting down the steps, the impatient and
[Page 152]
wrathful traveller leaped from the carriage. —He fell; and, by his precipitate speed, so fractured his leg, that he was conveyed to a chamber, groaning and cursing, closing the scene of his bitter resentment in the miserable character of the wounded and repentant traveller!
I quitted the coach and flew to his assistance, when to my infinite surprise I discovered that it was the insolent domestic of the Duke of Heartwing; we had only taken him up at Marlborough, he having proceeded so far on horseback, but being weary, preferred the ease of a stage-coach during the remainder of his journey. The darkness of the hour had prevented my seeing his features, which, though distorted by agony, on entering the chamber I instantly recognized. I started back: reflection told me that my enemy was not in a condition to bear reproaches; and, lest resentment should for a moment get the better of humanity,
[Page 153]
I again descended to the kitchen, where I had left the coachman finishing his morning draught.
After dispatching a messenger to Marlborough for a surgeon, I discovered to my great disappointment, that the stage-coach had departed during the scene of confusion, the guide being apprehensive that disagreeable consequences would arise from his neglect, and the accident which it had occasioned.
Upon inquiry I found that the domestic had obtained his reward for apprehending me, and was proceeding to Bath, for the purpose of engaging a house, and arranging accommodations, to receive the Duke of Heartwing, who was to leave London on the following day. After giving orders that every thing should be done for the sufferer's convenience, I quitted the public-house, and on foot once more set out for Bath.
[Page 154]
My road led across the downs; the weather was stormy, the sky thick and cloudy: I had pistols, loaded, about me; and, being equally a stranger to hope as to fear, I proceeded without the smallest apprehension of danger.
CHAP. LVIII. I had not walked more than a mile, when I was suddenly overtaken by two men on horseback; they slackened their pace as they passed me, and stopping short, entered into conversation. The moon was just beginning to rise, and its faint beams at intervals penetrated the scattered clouds, which were borne rapidly along by a keen and boisterous wind. I could perceive that the horsemen were well mounted; and they had
[Page 155]
also light sufficient to discover that I was equipped as a pedestrian. Several questions, or rather observations, passed on both sides, I was glad to find companions, and that the strangers seemed inclined to accompany me over the wide and solitary downs which lay before us.
One of the travellers dismounted, and leading his horse, walked slowly on beside me. The other kept a few paces before us, at times joining in conversation, and looking about him with more than common precaution; till, suddenly checking his horse, he exclaimed, addressing his companion, “By G---d, it will soon be day-break—Why don't you wish the gentleman a good journey.”
At this instant my walking associate presented a pistol, and demanded my money. I had never ceased to grasp mine within my coat pocket since the horsemen first overtook me; the highwayman perceived my intention to defend
[Page 156]
myself, and instantly fired; his pistol flashed in the pan; I returned the shot with success, for the robber fell; and a carriage at that moment coming in sight, his dastardly companion set off full speed across the downs towards Salisbury. I soon found that the vehicle was a mail-coach. I called to them to stop, and ran towards the horses' heads, but the guard presenting his blunderbuss, bade me “keep off,” or he would fire. The wind whistled too loudly for my voice to be distinctly heard, and I had no alternative but that of mounting the wounded highwayman's horse, and proceeding towards Bath with all possible expedition.
Arriving at Devizes, I stopped at the first inn, and inquired for the landlord, in order to acquaint him with what had happened; but I had scarcely entered the house when a courier, with two assistants, seized me; and vociferating—
[Page 157]
“This is the rascal who robbed my lady,” dragged me into a parlour, locked the door, and made me a prisoner.
Rage and consternation at first rendered me incapable of resisting their violence; but reason soon whispered that anger is never the associate of innocence; and, that if I would extricate myself from this new dilemma, I must act with cool deliberate fortitude. After a few moments of reflection, I calmly inquired upon what grounds they suspected my honesty. “Look at me,” said I, addressing the courier; “do I appear equipped for the office of a highwayman—without either boots, or spurs, or a disguise of any description?”
“I know your horse,” replied the courier; “I will swear to him amongst a thousand.”
“Will you also swear to my person?” said I, with a smile which I could not
[Page 158]
suppress, when I observed the assured confidence of my accuser.
“I know nothing about your person,” said he; “you wore a black crape over your face; and your boots might easily have been disposed of, to give a colour to your story, in case of detection. We should not have been so rigorous if you had not fired into the chaise, and terrified my lady.”
My pockets were rifled; when the two pistols, one loaded and the other discharged, corroborated the evidence against me. I was now conducted into a drawing-room, in order to ascertain whether the lady who had been robbed could identify my person. Little regarding the event of such a trial, and certain that all which I could say would be misconstrued, while prejudice prepossessed the minds of my accusers, I attended the domestics without hesitation,
[Page 159]
and in a few moments was ushered into the presence of the trembling Lady Emily Delvin.
She viewed me attentively; but with that sort of freezing contempt which did not condescend to recognize an old acquaintance in distress. I waited to see how far her inhumanity would lead her, when aided by the stern auxiliaries pride and resentment. I had forgot that few women ever forgive an instance of personal contempt: I had been too honest when Lady Emily distinguished me by her notice; and she now considered me as too much in her power to escape that punishment which was due to my insensibility.
I fixed my eyes on her's with calm and steady fortitude.—She neither blushed nor hesitated.
“Yes,” said she with easy effrontery, “it is the man—I am almost certain that it is the same figure, though his dress
[Page 160]
has been changed. I think the countenance is also very like.”
“The highwayman's face was covered with black crape, my lady,” interrupted the courier.
Lady Emily seemed rather disconcerted;—“The fellow's complexion might have deceived you,” said she, averting her eyes, and no longer able to encounter the steady gaze of innocence. I could not suppress a smile, which was the effect of my secret triumph.
“Lady Emily,” said I, “is it possible that you can feign at a moment so critical, so menacing to my safety?”
She drew up her form, and, exalting her eye-brows with the most insulting barbarity, replied—“This is not your first offence; and I consider myself bound by the laws of retribution to punish your ingratitude.”
While she concluded these words she quitted the room, and left me at the mercy
[Page 161]
of her insolent agents. As she departed I could not help repeating a silly stanza which I had written at a very early age, and which, till that hour, had never since recurred to my memory.—
O woman! greatest friend or foe,
   Thou source of bliss or evil!
To man, the certain weal or woe,
   An angel or a devil!
Since mother Eve, the sex has been
   To wide creation given,
To make this busy bustling scene
   A very Hell or Heaven!
[Page 162]
CHAP. LIX. I was immediately conveyed to prison, there to wait till several messengers, who were dispatched in search of the wounded highwayman, should return either to detect me in a fabricated story, or to confirm my innocence of the charge alleged against me.
I was scarcely vexed at my situation.—Having so frequently been the victim of false appearances, this event did not excite the least emotion. The effrontery of Lady Emily impressed my mind much more than the accusation against me. I recollected the earliest opinion which she left upon my memory, when she discarded and condemned to death the gentle intelligent Chance, to make room for a trifling, insignificant stranger.
[Page 163]
The conclusion may not be far removed from probability, that the bosom which can treat with cruelty an attached and faithful dog, would not hesitate to persecute a neglectful and offending lover with equal rancour, and equal perseverance.
Waiting patiently for the result of the inquiries set on foot, I began to imagine that my existence was ordained to be one perpetual scene of trial; and that all my efforts to counteract the will of fate must prove ineffectual: with this idea, which might be authorized by many a predestinarian, whose opinions have been confirmed by the caprices of nature, I resigned myself to the unwearied hand of persecution, neither seeking to repel nor hoping to arrest the arrows of destruction.
As I have before remarked, the muse never forsook me, when fortune was most severe: I no sooner entered my prison
[Page 164]
than, with no light but that which a grated window afforded, I wrote the following little ode, in humble imitation of Pope's juvenile production:
How blest is he, who born to tread
   The silent paths of sweet repose,
Finds peace beneath the rural shed,
                                         Which pomp ne'er knows.
Who roves, with independent mind,
   O'er hills and meads and flow'ry plains,
That feast on Nature's lap to find
                                         Which pride disdains.
How blest! to sing, and talk, and smile,
   The busy envious world forgot,
To fear no lurking stings of guile,
                                         In his low cot.
When high the matin lark is seen
   With flutt'ring wings, and shrilly song,
He saunters o'er the dewy green,
                                         And fears no wrong.
And when the sultry sun flames high,
   He seeks the rural shade or dell,
No fierce banditti lurking nigh,
                                         With murd'rous spell.
[Page 165]
As ev'ning's crimson shadows fade,
   And twilight spreads its mantle grey,
He plods along the upland glade,
                                         Serenely gay.
Then on some pallet, clean and low,
   He sleeps, nor dreams of ills the while;
And when the eastern mountains glow,
                                         He wakes to smile.
He shuns the pride of wealth and birth,
   No vassal's lord, no tyrant's slave;
His cot the haunt of modest worth,
                                         The turf his grave.
In the course of the day the messengers returned; the wounded highwayman had either contrived to escape, or had been conveyed from the spot where he fell by his confederates. The track of blood, however, corroborated my report, and a farther evidence confirmed my innocence. This was no other than the master of a small public-house, where the highwayman had supped the preceding night, who remembered the
[Page 166]
horse, and positively swore that I was not the person whom he had seen mount him a little before midnight. This clear and voluntary evidence was considerably strengthened by the general character of the witness, who was known by the name of Honest Ned, of the Black Lion.
As soon as I was set at liberty, I thought it most advisable to make the best of my way out of the town. Curiosity having drawn together a vast concourse of people, I obtained information of a private road which led through lanes and meadows, and again set out on foot to avoid every impediment, and to elude observation.
I had some time lost sight of the town, when compunction struck upon my heart for having neglected to reward the honest fellow whose voluntary interference had snatched me from so unpleasant a dilemma. Actuated by that strong and unaccountable impulse which
[Page 167]
through life has led me on to peril, I turned suddenly back, and resolved to visit the habitation of Honest Ned. I inquired the way, and was directed across a wide common, near half a mile from the high road.—I hastened thither with less prudence than expedition: it was almost dark when I entered the house; the landlord had not yet returned from Devizes, and there was no person at home excepting an old woman, who was deaf and nearly foolish, and a lad, who either could not or would not give me any satisfactory information.
Having been too much engaged during the day to think of eating, I now began to find hunger an unsatisfied companion. Some cold meat and an excellent tankard of ale being set before me, I commenced my meal with an appetite which rendered the most homely fare exquisitely delicious. I had scarcely began to eat, when taking the tankard
[Page 168]
which foamed with nut-brown liquor, I perceived that the handle was slightly stained with crimson.—A sudden horror seized me! I examined it minutely; the mark was evidently made by a bloody hand. My consternation conjured up a thousand wild ideas: the house was lonesome—the night dark—the wind howled over the common—and no carriage was to be had nearer than three miles.
In the confusion of the day I had forgot to demand my pistols, which had been taken from me, and my situation was painfully perplexing—it was dangerous to stay, it would have been cowardly to depart. I knew, by fatal experience, that conjecture was apt to mislead where appearances were suspicious. The reflection lulled my alarm, and I resolved to await the arrival of Honest Ned, let the consequences be what they may.
[Page 169]
Midnight came, and my landlord was still absent. I questioned the old woman—but she returned answers so incoherent, that I soon found my inquiries useless. The night continued stormy, the rain pattered against the casements, and the wind whistled over the heath more shrilly than ever. I seated myself by the expiring embers of a wood fire, the house affording no bed for travellers, and being drowsy after a day of such busy inquietude, was sinking into a heavy slumber, when a deep groan awakened me. I sprung from my chair, and listened attentively—no noise was heard but the bleak blast which with short intervals yelled round the low roof; and the sonorous respiration of the old woman, who snored by the fireside in the adjoining kitchen. After again listening during several minutes, I resumed my seat, collected the dying embers, replenished the hearth with a
[Page 170]
fresh log of fuel, and, overpowered by fatigue of mind and body, again prepared to slumber.
CHAP. LX. I had slept some time, when I was startled by a sudden noise, which at first I could scarcely account for, till a second tap at the window—shutter convinced me that some one wished to enter. I informed the old woman, who instantly roused herself, and proceeded to open the door. I kept myself as much as possible concealed, only peeping through a crevice in the thin wainscot, which divided the parlour from the kitchen. The landlord entered, followed by a well—dressed man: they were both booted and spurred. The lad was ordered to take their horses into the stable, and I
[Page 171]
listened with anxious attention to all their proceedings.
They ascended a small staircase, which was nearly opposite to the aperture of observation, the old woman carrying a light, and still half asleep. I heard them open a chamber door. This was no moment for childish apprehension: the hour, the place, the bloodstained tankard, and the scene before me, demanded more than ordinary resolution. I quitted the parlour, and stealing up the stairs approached the chamber door, where I heard confused whisperings, but nothing distinctly. I now recollected that, when the landlord entered, I had observed his companion place his pistols on the kitchen table. Again I descended softly, and arming myself, resolved to explore this mysterious adventure, or to perish in the trial. Once more at the threshold of the bedchamber, I heard distinctly half-smothered
[Page 172]
groans, and the low deep hum of voices, almost incessant. “Jesus, have mercy! how he bleeds!” exclaimed the old woman. “Peace, you fool,” cried one of the men, whom by his accent I judged to be the landlord: “the thing will soon be done; the knives are sharp, and necessity has no law.” Again an agonized groan made my blood almost freeze with horror. No longer able to remain a patient listener under such circumstances, I suddenly threw open the door, and rushed into the apartment, when the objects presented to my view instantly unravelled the mystery. The person who had arrived with the landlord was a surgeon, who at the moment of my entering the room was extracting a ball from the shoulder of a young man, who lay in the bed, pale, and evidently in extreme torture.
Though there remained not a doubt in my own mind, that the wounded person
[Page 173]
was the highwayman, whom I had met on Marlborough Downs, I felt every vein in my heart throb with pity when I beheld his agonizing situation. Every drop of blood that trickled from his wound, seemed to wash away the enormity of his transgression. He raised his languid eyes, with imploring contrition;—he seemed to recollect, and to fear me. I threw my pistols on a chair which stood near the bed, and with involuntary commiseration inquired, whether I could be of service.
The young man, for though checked in his career of guilt, he was not much older than myself, with a feeble voice thanked me: the surgeon shook his head: the landlord hung his brow, abashed and self-reproved. I was no longer in doubt: the fact was evident. The surgeon performed his operation with skill and humanity. I paid him for his trouble, desired him to come
[Page 174]
again, and, without asking any questions, he departed for Bath, from whence the landlord had brought him. It was time that the exhausted sufferer should endeavour to sleep. I whispered an assurance that he had nothing to fear from me; and again descended to the parlour.
Requesting honest Ned to bring another tankard of his best ale, we sat down together to drink it. On finishing my draught, and presenting the handle to my companion, he perceived the mark of blood which was still visible. His face grew wan,—his hand trembled,;— he could scarcely lift the tankard;—he drank little, and with pretended awkwardness spilt the remainder, so as to completely wash away the stain. “Honest Ned!” said I smiling, “is that the way you rub off scores? You should have been less precipitate, if only to remind you of the debt of kindness which
[Page 175]
your guest will scarcely be able to repay. Let the tankard be washed clean, and we will drink to the reformation of your wounded lodger.” The lad was dispatched to the cellar, and the landlord began to feel compunction. “If you all have patience to hear my story,” said he, “you will acquit my conscience of every dishonest motive.”
“Proceed,” said I.
The landlord swallowed a large draught to mend his shattered resolution; and then, after many “hems” and “ha's,” and hesitating “wells,” and “so's,” and “as your honour is thinking—and as I was a-saying,”—at length began to confess the whole business.
“I must tell you,” cried he, “before I begin my story, that the poor gentleman above, is a gentleman: and though I am mightily afeard that he has
[Page 176]
taken the road of his betters, and turned to wicked ways—”
“That is to say, to high -ways,” interrupted I, smiling. The narrator continued:—
“You must know that the silly young man has many grand relations, aye and rich ones: his mother is a great gentlewoman, worth a power of money, which she means to leave to this untoward boy. And so, you must know, as I was a-telling you, all in high style, comes he to Bath; and wishing to outdo all outdoings, he brings with him a new—fashioned carbuncle, and two blood nags;—nice cattle, your honour!”
“I don't comprehend you,” said I.
“Why,” continued the landlord, “a go-by-the-ground, with two wheels, just for all the world like a cart: why you may see um as thick as hops along the Western road: scarce a day passes, but
[Page 177]
I meet one of your quality—folks flying along, without a head, who but they, for the benefit of the dust.”
“Without a head! I am now more at a loss than ever,” said I.
“Why they have no tilt to kiver um from the weather. Sometimes indeed they've a got a pair of little bits of wings, for all the world like a butterfly—”
“You mean a curricle,” said I.
“Aye, a chronicle,” cried Ned, nodding over his tankard, and more than half asleep. “So, as I was a—telling you, to Bath he comes; who but he; as flashy as may be, and as gay as a lord. He was soon made much of; and taken up and squat down, like any thing. He was the very town-talk of all Bath; visited and idleised by the quality all the way from Landsdown to the Avon. Every house was welcome to him, and every lady was at his sarvice.
[Page 178]
He'd a rare time on't to be sure, and enough to do, God knows. But the evil day was at hand, as parson said last Sunday, and he's as good a christian as ever broke bread, let the other be where he will. He has been rector of our parish ever since his great great great grandfather's time, a matter of a hundred and fifty years, or thereabouts; and he preaches every Sunday, who but he, as fresh as a four-year-old, and as sober as a judge: ‘tisn't all your fat bishops that can say as much, your honour.”
“True; but go on with your story.”
“So, as I was a-telling you,” continued honest Ned, “who should fall in love with him but my Lady Emily Delver! O! your honour, she's a deep one! She can do a bit of dirty work as well as her neighbors. If she isn't as arrant a—knave—as ever was hanged, I'm no conjuror!”
“I believe you,” said I: “go on.”
[Page 179]
“There was a man, not long ago, tried at our sizes, who was sent beyondseas for a less matter than these quality ladies does daily, every mother's son of 'em, or I know who's belied most damnably: God forgive me for swearing, but I can never think of their ways but my blood boils, as it were. Why, there was a lord at Bath not long since, that was found out in one of his odd tricks, and a got himself killed as a sample for others!”
“Well, well, go on with your story,” said I.
“As I was a—telling you, my Lady Delver, and her accomplishers, gets him to gaming—table: such doings! Night after night, day after day, Sundays and working—days, on goes they, till off goes he! For, as I hope to be saved, they didn't leave him a brass farthing to pay turnpike. So then, aping his betters, he takes up with
[Page 180]
bad company, and comes and lodges with I. And, as parson says, “charity covereth a multitude of sins,” I thought a little matter on't shewn to a poor body in distress, might be of sarvice to him. And to keep him from making away with himself, for one misfortune seldom comes alone, I lends him my brown nag: there isn't a cleverer bit of blood in the county, your honour. I bought him of a groom that took him for part of his wagers, when his master, he was one of your quality too, morriced off, and paid his creditors nothing in the pound. I'll tell you how it happened.”
“At a future period,” said I: “finish your story first, and then we will talk of other matters.”
“So as I was a-telling you, the young spendthrift rogue, being as dull as a cat, and as poor as a church mouse, I lends him my brown nag; and he buys him, after a trial, with a promissory note for
[Page 181]
forty pounds, to be paid when he comes to years of discretion—”
“On doomsday,” interrupted I gravely.
“Why may be so, or Midsummer, or Michaelmas, or some such day. Hard days for us poor tenants: the quality don't mind how we get it, so as they have it. Our lord of the manor has got an old steward,—a bitter one as ever broke bread! as sharp as a needle, and as cunning as a fox, your honour. As sure as pay-day arrives, here comes he, and away goes I, to fetch my canvass bag, no sooner full than empty! Then I toils and works like carrier's horse against next pay-day. But I'm getting out of my story again.”
A draught of ale replenished his memory, and he continued the narrative.
“So, as I was a-telling you, he was never at rest waking nor sleeping. Always grumbling and making one as hippish
[Page 182]
as may be. And there used to come a sort of a scape-grace to consult with him; an odd haram-scare-'em chap; a sort of a bastard sprig of quality, your honour; one of your fortunehunters. Bath swarms with 'em. Only last summer a young lady absconds with one of um; a married man! But miss was one of the gay ones; she was a deep hand at an odd-trick, and as loving as may be: they say that's the way with all your quality ladies.”
“Well, and what became of your lodger and your brown nag?” said I.
“Why last night, just as clock struck eleven, within a minute or so, out goes he, with the devil at his heels, and I follows him.”
“At his heels?” said I.
“Close as wax, your honour, till he comes to stable door. In a goes, and saddles the brown nag, cursing and damning all the while, who but he?
[Page 183]
Then I begins to argify the matter, but he was as deaf as a post, and as obstinate as a mule: till seizing the bridle, up goes he, and a'ter him goes I, bawling and swearing, till I could hear the hoofs of the beast no longer.”
“Well, and how came he home?” said I.
“In cart, your honour. Many a man has gone to a worse home, in a better; carriage. ’Tisn't all gold that glitters. So as I was a-telling you, midnight coming on apace, and a bitter night 'twas, and young spark being inclined to play truant, I begins to grow dubous, and in a twinkling takes cart, and sets out, who but I, a'ter my brown nag. I soon came to Marlborough Downs, and there, a little after day-break, I finds young 'squire groaning and bleeding, who but he. I vow and declare, my heart yearned when I saw him in such a pitiful plight. The sight of cart made
[Page 184]
him caper like a parched pea, your honour, as though he thought it ominous; so up goes he, and a'ter him goes I; and off we set, along by-way's and lanes, and such like, till his eyes once more spied out our old black lion.”
“What could tempt him to so rash and criminal an action?” said I.
“Example, your honour; high company led on to high ways; and one of the gang put it into his head to rob my lady:—so he swears to do it, who but he! and away they go, the devil at their heels, just before her ladyship; up to the window goes he, and into a quandary goes she. Then, 'squire axes for a purse which my lady had before taken from somebody else, and so the matter ended.”
By the time that honest Ned concluded his long-spun narrative, the sun began to enter our casement. We parted. I threw myself into a wicker
[Page 185]
chair by a blazing fire, and sunk into a deep sleep, which lasted several hours.
CHAP. LXI. As soon as I awoke I repaired to the chamber of the unfortunate and rash sufferer. He shrunk at the sight of me, and seemed overwhelmed with compunction. I entered into earnest conversation with him, and proposed, if he felt himself capable of bearing the motion of a carriage, that he should remove nearer to Bath, for the advantage of chirurgical assistance. “Let me perish here,” said he; “why prolong a few short hours of life, to suffer a public and ignominious death?” His agitated voice, the tortures of mental, united with corporeal
[Page 186]
sufferings, subdued my resentment, and I promised to conceal his crime, with the hope that his remaining days would be devoted to repentance.
“Alas!” said he, stretchin forth his arms, and clasping his trembling hands, “I am more unfortunate than criminal. Robbed at a gaming-table, I sought to recover that which had been stolen from me; but my hand resisted the office of a murderer; the pistol was discharged at random, and I failed in the first; yes, I call God to witness! the first dishonest act that my mind ever meditated. My associate and counsellor reproved my timidity, and attributed that trepidation to cowardice, which was in fact the effect of conscious horror. I would have lest him. I proposed relinquishing the fatal expedition: ‘Then, said he, ‘ my life is at your mercy, you will turn evidence, and I shall suffer for my credulous reliance on a mean designing coward.’
[Page 187]
The idea rendered me desperate. To this infamous associate I was indebted thirty pounds, won at a public hazard-table. He had demanded payment from day to day; he now urged me with threats, and at length taunted me with reproaches: called me a tame and whining blockhead, who, with Fortune eternally before me, turned from her to be miserable. I dared not resent his conduct; he had me in the toil; my life was in his hands:—we crossed the Downs together. I confessed my want to resolution to commit so vile a deed. We stopped our horses at a small distance from the high road, and for some minutes conversed upon the subject. No other carriage passed and you appeared in sight. ‘You cannot fear a foot-passenger,’ said my companion: ‘try once more, and if you have any manly courage in your nature, prove it.’ We joined in conversation; —you know the rest.—I fell!”
[Page 188]
The effort overwhelmed him, and he funk upon his pillow totally exhausted.
A considerable time elapsed before he had strength to utter another syllable. I intreated him to compose his mind, and to persevere in that conscious selfcorrection, which would be his surest safeguard in every future scene of worldly trial. He feebly articulated his grateful acknowledgments; and, after he had swallowed some light nourishment, he endeavoured to take that rest, of which despair had, during the preceding night, entirely deprived him. Previous to his dropping asleep, he requested that in the course of the day I would write a letter to his mother. I promised; and taking up a book which lay in the chamber, seated myself near the window to await a second visit from the surgeon, whom I had desired again to examine his wound, before the expiration of twelve hours.
[Page 189]
The story of the young criminal strongly interested my feelings; while more than half his load of guilt seemed to devolve on his hardened accomplice. My reflection naturally turned towards the gaming-table; the vortex of destruction, the nursery of vice, the school of licentiousness: and I shuddered to remember that a propensity which degrades even a masculine education, should be so unblushingly adopted and exercised by those lovely and once feminine beings in whom profligacy appears with tenfold deformity.
Half the calamities which have befallen me through my journey of affliction, I may attribute to the gamingtable;—myself only once an actor in the sombre scene of shuffling and deception, yet doomed for ever to be a mourning spectator of its fatal consequences.
[Page 190]
The invalid fell into a profound sleep, from which he was awakened by a second visit from the surgeon, who came to examine his wound. The symptoms were alarming: his fever was high, and his conversation evinced strong marks of increasing delirium. I attended the unbinding of his wound, and the comments which followed distressed me infinitely.
“The ball was aimed with extraordinary malignity,” said the surgeon. “It might have penetrated a more mortal part, but none that could inflict severer torture. I apprehend that the gentleman was wounded by a footpad. The landlord informed me so on our way from Bath.”
I made no reply. Indeed I could not contradict the assertion, without declaring the criminality of my imprudent and agonized victim.
[Page 191]
The surgeon, after a short pause, continued:—“I have seen this gentleman frequently, during the last season, at Bath; I recollect his countenance perfectly; and I advise you, Sir, if you are his friend, to dispatch a messenger with an account of his precarious situation, to his nearest connections: I really cannot answer for his life twelve hours.”
My blood crept cold through every vein:—a sensation undescribably horrible possessed my mind, and I looked towards the bed with the most painful compunction. Every deep-fetched sigh, every half-stifled groan which issued from his tortured bosom, wrung the fibres of my heart: I would gladly have exchanged situations with the sufferer; and even envied him the opening prospect of a peaceful grave. Alas, Rosanna! it was more than common pity that occasioned these emotions:—sympathy, —instinctive affection,—the terror
[Page 192]
of something fatally interesting, and still unknown, seized on my senses:—I was strangely, wildly possessed, by fear and solicitude. The surgeon departed. I once more approached the bed, and undrawing the curtains, fixed my gaze on the pale features of the object before me. A tear started from my eyes;—I did not blush at my weakness; it was the voluntary sensation of pure and irresistible nature.
I frequently inquired the young highwayman's name, but no person in the family would satisfy my curiosity. Before evening his fever augmented; his countenance changed, and his voice became so feeble, that the few incoherent words which he uttered were scarcely audible. I concluded that he could not survive many hours; and the idea of seeing him expire was too terrible to be supported. After watching him till past midnight, and finding him every moment grow
[Page 193]
worse and worse, I requested honest Ned to lend me his brown nag, in order that. I might immediately set out for Bath: the landlord readily complied, and we repaired to the stable to saddle him for my expedition.
“Ah, master!” cried my host of the Black Lion, “young 'squire has made but a very sorry business on't! He will die as sure as my name's Ned; and, what is worst of all, I'm afeard I shall have the expence of burying him, and doctor's bill to pay into the bargain. Ah, your honour! 'tis no wonder that doctors live by other people's dying; they have all the game in their own hands, and dead men tell no tales, as one may say. There is always mischief when doctor's in the wind;—for, as the old saying goes, ‘'tis an ill wind that blows nobody good .’ But as I was a-telling you, I'm afeard 'squire is not long for this world,—and when he takes leave of us,
[Page 194]
who's to pay piper? He can't lie above-ground.”
“'Tis a pity you ever took him in as a lodger,” said I.
“Why, your honour, I take in every body that comes to my house. The poorest higgler that stops at my door, walks away lighter than a-comes; and the greatest lords often go to worse houses, or they are belied most confoundedly. Ah, your honour! it was that cursed Jezabel Lady Delver that brought young 'squire to shame. A poor body would be whipped from parish to parish, for a less matter than quality does every day in the year. 'Squire will be off as sure as a gun, your honour.”
“I hope not,” said I; “though I confess that the symptoms are at present alarming.”
“Your honour will have but a dismal ride on't,” cried the landlord, leaning
[Page 195]
on the back of his brown nag, and looking more discontentedly than usual.
“The sky is as dark as pitch, and the wind blows a hurricane. You must cross our heath, and along by castlewall, before you get into the western road; and a more solitary place isn't to be met with in the whole county. Lord bless'e, your honour, how you would stare if you was but to hear the comical stories our country-folks tell about a murder, and two ghosts that walk there—who but they— as frightful as may be!”
“I do not believe in tales of superstition,” said I; “they are the mere inventions of ignorance and fear:—a legion of ghosts should not prevent my passing the heath, or the castle-wall, in case I was inclined to do either.—Evil spirits are every day growing so common, that we meet them in all societies.”
[Page 196]
“Sure!” cried the landlord. “And why dont'e try to pray um into the Red Sea?”
“Prayers are out of fashion, honest Ned,” answered I. “The evil spirits I speak of set religion at defiance.”
“Sure!—But this ghost, which I was a-speaking of, is for all the world like a sperit,” cried the landlord, looking fearfully round him. “Parson hinted somewhat about it in pulpit last Midsummer-eve: for a said that sperits of darkness walked upon the face of the earth. We all knew well enough what a meant; and since that day the stoutesthearted be rather timersome about going over heath, or near castle-walls, with the devil at their heels, as one may say. Shall I tell you the history about Ghost and Grey doublet? a walks always, so country-folks say, when tis as dark as pitch!—Bad deeds always come to light, your honour.”
[Page 197]
The landlord proceeded to saddle his brown nag while he related the story, which, in a leisure hour, I since versified as follows:
THE DOUBLET OF GREY I.
Beneath the tall turrets that nod o'er the dell,
   A dark forest now blackens the mound;
Where often, at dawn-light, the deep-sounding bell
Tolls sadly and solemn a soul-parting knell,
   While the ruin re-echoes the sound.
II.
Yet long has the castle been left to decay,
   For its ramparts are skirted with thorn;
And no one by moonlight will venture that way,
Lest they meet the poor maid, in her doublet of grey,
   As she wanders, all pale and forlorn!
III.
“And why should she wander? O tell me, I pray,
   And, oh! why does she wander alone?”
Beneath the dark ivy, now left to decay,
With no shroud, but a coarse simple doublet of grey,
   Lies her bosom as cold as a stone.
[Page 198]
IV.
Time was when no form was so fresh, or so fair,
   Or so comely, when richly array'd:
She was tall, and the jewels that blaz'd in her hair
Could no more with her eye's living lustre compare,
   Than a rose with the cheek of the maid.
V.
She lov'd!—but the youth, who had vanquish'd her heart,
Was the heir of a peasant's hard toil;
For no treasure had he: yet, a stranger to art,
He would oft by a look to the damsel impart
   What the damsel receiv'd with a smile.
VI.
Whene'er to the wake or the chace she wou'd go,
   The young Theodore loiter'd that way;
Did the sun-beams of summer invitingly glow,
Or across the bleak common the winter winds blow,
   Still he watch'd till the closing of day.
VII.
Her parents so wealthy, her kindred so proud,
   Heard the story of love with dismay;
They rav'd, and they storm'd, by the Virgin they vow'd,
That, before they would see her so wedded, a shroud
   Should be Madeline's bridal array.
[Page 199]
VIII.
One night, it was winter, all dreary and cold,
   And the moon-beams shone paly and clear;
When she open'd her lattice, in hopes to behold
Her Theodore's form, when the turret-bell toll'd,
   And the blood in her-heart froze with fear.
IX.
Near the green-mantled moat her stern father she spied,
   And a grave he was making with speed;
The light, which all silver'd the castle's strong side,
Display'd his wild gestures, while madly he cry'd—
   “Cursed caitiff! thy bosom shall bleed!”
X.
Distracted, forlorn, from the castle of pride,
   She escap'd at the next close of day,
Her soft-blushing cheek, with dark berries all dy'd,
With a spear on her shoulder, a sword by her side,
   And her form in a doublet of grey.
XI.
She travers'd the courts, not a vassal was seen,
   Through the gate, hung with ivy, she flew:
The sky was unclouded, the air was serene,
The moon shot its rays, the long vistas between,
   And her doublet was spangled with dew.
[Page 200]
XII.
O'er the cold breezy downs to the hamlet she hied,
   Where the cottage of Theodore stood;
For its low roof of rushes she oft had descried,
When she drank of the brook that foam'd wild by its side,
   While the keen hunters travers'd the wood.
XIII.
The sky on a sudden grew dark, and the wind,
   With a deep sullen murmur, rush'd by;
She wander'd about, but no path cou'd she find,
While horrors on horrors encompass'd her mind
   When she found that no shelter was nigh.
XIV.
And now, on the dry wither'd fern, she cou'd hear
   The hoofs of swift horses rebound;
She stopp'd and she listen'd, she trembled with fear,
When a voice most prophetic and sad met her ear,
   And she shudder'd and shrunk at the sound.
XV.
“'Tis here we will wait,” cry'd the horseman; “for see
   How the moon with black clouds is o'erspread;
No hut yields a shelter, no forest a tree—
This heath shall young Theodore's bridal-couch be,
   And the cold earth shall pillow his head.
[Page 201]
XVI.
“Hark! some on approaches:—now stand we aside,
   We shall know him—for see, the moon's clear;
In a doublet of grey he now waits for his bride,
But, ere dawn-light, the Carle shall repent of his pride,
   And his pale mangled body rest here.”
XVII.
Again, the moon shrouded in clouds, o'er the plain
   The horsemen were scatter'd far wide;
The night became stormy, the fast falling rain
Beat hard on her bosom, which dar'd not complain,
   And the torrent roll'd swift by her side.
XVIII.
Now clashing of swords overwhelm'd her with dread,
   While her ear met the deep-groan of death;
   “Yield, yield thee, bold peasant,” the murderer said,
   “This turf with thy heart's dearest blood shall be red,
      And thy bones whiten over the heath.”
XIX.
Now shrieking, despairing, she starts from the ground,
   And her spear, with new strength, she let's go:
She aim'd it at random, she felt it rebound
From the sure hand of Fate, which inflicted the wound,
   As it drank the life-blood of her foe.
[Page 202]
XX.
The morning advanced, o'er the pale chilling skies
   Soon the warm rosy tints circled wide;
But, oh God! with what anguish, what terror she flies,
When her father, all cover'd with wounds, she descries
   With her lover's pale corpse by his side!
XXI.
Half frantic she fell on her parent's cold breast,
   And she bath'd her white bosom with gore;
Then, in anguish the form of young Theodore press'd—
   “I will yet be thy bride, in the grave we will rest,”
   She exclaim'd; and she suffer'd no more.
XXII.
Now o'er the wild heath when the winter winds blow,
   And the moon-silver'd fern branches wave,
Pale Theodore's spectre is seen gliding slow,
As he calls on the damsel in accents of woe,
   Till the bell warns him back to his grave.
XXIII.
And while the deep found echoes over the wood,
   Now the villagers shrink with dismay;
For, as legends declare; where the castle once stood,
Mid the ruins, by moonlight, all cover'd with blood,
   Shrieks the maid—in ber doublet of grey !
[Page 203]
CHAP. LXII. The landlord having saddled the brown nag, I once more repaired to the chamber where the young highwayman lay to all appearance expiring. I addressed him several times, and as he made me no answer, I concluded that he was incapable of speaking. I touched his cheek—it was cold; and the damp of death glistened on his forehead.
It was impossible to describe what I felt at that moment—the criminal had so much to urge in extenuation of his conduct; and I knew by fatal experience how easily unsuspecting minds are entrapped by the subtilty of the vicious, that I almost considered myself as culpable in having deprived of existence a being who might have reformed, and
[Page 204]
become a valuable member of society. Three times I closed the curtains, and three times again opened them, to take a last look at the unfortunate sufferer; but I found that the longer I contemplated his pale and distorted features, the more my resolution seemed to diminish. I therefore, with a painful effort, quitted the room, and descended to the kitchen.
The landlord again advised me to delay my journey till the morning: “I don't know why,” said he, “but somehow I have a strange foreboding that you'll never get safe to Bath. The weather is stormy, and the rain pours in torrents; one wou'dn't turn a dog out on such a night, much less your honour. I would no more think of crossing our heath than of flying; and I'm none of your faint-hearted ones neither.”
“What should molest me?” said I; for I began to suspect that honest Ned
[Page 205]
knew of more wanderers on the heath than those which the story of the ghost had discovered.
“Why, that's more than I can say,” replied the landlord. “'Tis a lonesome road, and there isn't a star to be seen from east to west, as one may say. Only hark how the wind whistles! This is a rare night for ghosts and witches, and such like gentry. I'll warrant all the old women in the parish are at this moment telling frightful stories round their fire-sides, about goblins, and fairies, and murders.—You had better stay and drink a tankard of our ale, your honour. Zooks, how the chimnies rattle!—Why, the very casements will be beat in by the hail and the rain! Well, this is a night! Why, I question whether there has been such another in the memory of man!”
“The tempest is too violent to last long,” said I: “before I have crossed
[Page 206]
the heath it will be over. I am used to storms and accustomed to difficulties.— The rain and hail will not hurt me.”
“Ah, your honour!” replied the landlord, shaking his wise head, “there is nothing so dangerous as being foolhardy. If young 'squire had but followed my advice, he wou'dn't have been in such a terrible plight, as one may say. Howsomedever, if you be determined to brave both the wind and the weather, we will take one more tankard before you go.”
“With all my heart,” answered I; “but you must bring it directly.”
“What say you to a few eggs in it, and a little nutmeg?”
“Very well; be it so.”
“It will relish a rasher; and a drop of brandy added will keep the cold out of your stomach.”
“Be expeditious then,” said I; “for time flies rapidly.”
[Page 207]
“Fair and softly,” cried the landlord; “he stumbles that runs fast, as one may say.”
He now took his lantern, and crossing the stable-yard to his beer-cellar, a sudden gust of wind blew open the door, and extinguished the candle. The landlord returned:—“Most haste, worse speed,” cried he, again placing the light in the lantern, and sallying forth with his tankard towards the cellar. In a few minutes he came back.—“Good Lord! this is a night indeed!” exclaimed he— “The tiles are flying from the roof— who but they? and the trees in our barton crack and rustle as though they were torn up by the very roots! I warrant the ruins of the old castle are making a fine rumpus: there won't be one stone left a-top of t'other! Lord a mercy! my blood runs cold to think on't! such a hurley-burley was never before heard
[Page 208]
in the heavens! You cannot think of travelling till things be a little quiet.”
The ale being ready, I took a draught from the tankard; and after giving the landlord a sum sufficient to defray the funeral expences of the dying man, mounted the brown nag, while his master held the bridle, and with many earnest intreaties would have dissuaded me from my purpose.
“Mercy on us! how the doors clap! what a night is this to travel! Only but look at the sky! Why the heath seems for all the world like a grave!—one can't see one's hand before one. Well, he that's born to be hanged will never be drowned; but such a deluge of rain did I never see in all my born days. I suppose you know the way; mind you don't run foul of gibbet—or tumble into marle-pits—And take heed you don't get up to hill among the ruins;
[Page 209]
you'll be finely maz'd if you ben't careful.”
I was just setting off when honest Ned called to me, and desired that I would stop half a minute, “Take another draught,” said he, “and let's drink to your safe journey.”
I thanked him, but declined drinking any more; “Your good wishes are the same,” said I, shaking his hand, as he finished the tankard.
“The wind cuts like a razor!” cried honest Ned; “I can hardly find in my heart to let you go after all; for, give the devil his due, your honour is a worthy gentleman.”
The old woman now came hobbling towards us—“For God's sake, master, go up to poor young 'squire,” said she.
I guessed the cause of her sudden alarm; I instantly, spurring my horse, broke from the landlord; and as well as
[Page 210]
the darkness would permit, hastened across the common.
Never did the landlord speak more truly than when he declared that such a night was scarcely to be remembered. But my thoughts were too intently fixed on past events to dread or regard the approach of future calamities. The rain, which had been incessantly falling since twilight, had nearly inundated a great part of the heath, and I was obliged to proceed at a foot-pace till I reached a narrow lane; I knew, by the pressure of my horse's hoofs, that I was on a gravel-beaten road; the splashy turf rendering the sound wholly different. Still I advanced, and still the tempest howled on every side. I could perceive, by the position of my saddle, that we were on an acclivity, and I was ruminating on the story of Madeline with her doublet of grey, when on a
[Page 211]
sudden a bell tolled, and I started from my reverie to listen.
Again the solemn vibration mingled with the blast, as it rose and fell in its progress over the common. I stopped my horse: the singularity of my situation caused a momentary thrilling through my heart. The bell continued to toll, and the storm yelled more furiously than ever. I began to wish I had followed the wise counsel of honest Ned, and was about to turn my horse, and retrace my dreary path, when I perceived a dim light advancing over the heath at more than a hundred yards distant from the place where I stopped. It moved slowly—I shuddered! A painful sensation, which has never failed to inform me with prophetic horror, when any event nearly interested my feelings, at that moment chilled my breast. I spurred my horse, and, with a forced and desperate resolution
[Page 212]
hastened towards the light, with as much speed as the roads and the situation would permit me.
As I approached the flame, which continued to move onward, sometimes dimmed by torrents pouring from the sky, which not a single star illumined, and at others glaring, as the wind fanned it into new vigour,I observed something white gliding after it.
Conjecture now became almost bewildered; and I resolved to convince myself by what means such an appearance, at such an hour, and in a place so lonely, could be produced. On approaching the spot, I discovered a hearse drawn by fix horses, and ornamented with plumes of white feathers. At that moment the torch, which an attendant carried before the horses to light their way, by a keen and hurrying blast of wind, was suddenly extinguished. The cavalcade halted, and I stopped to recover
[Page 213]
from the surprise which it had, in spite of all my resolution, occasioned.
CHAP. LXIII. I arrested my steps beside the gloomy cavalcade, and during many minutes had not power to proceed on my journey. The recollection of the state in which I had left the highwayman, and the idea that he was then a corpse, made me shudder while I contemplated the pompous procession before me.
The dawn began faintly to break, and the dim dusky light rendered the surrounding scenery doubly solitary. I looked, awfully impressed, across the heath; the furze and fern were in many places inundated by the heavy and long continued fall of rain. The wind was
[Page 214]
less boisterous than it had been on my leaving the Black Lion: but the chains, which were rivetted round the human scare-crow suspended from the gibbet, filled up the pause with a creeking sound, which inspired the mind with a mixture of melancholy and horror, that was undescribable. I stopped for a moment to gaze on the wretched remnant of mortality, parched by the wind and withered by the sun, while the keen blast blew it from side to side, when the bell again vibrated through the air, and fixed my attention. I instantly turned towards the quarter from whence the solemn sound proceeded, and observed, by the grey morning light, the ivy-covered turrets of an ancient village church, just visible above the wood, whose ruined castle my landlord had so minutely and superstitiously described. One-half the mystery of the maid in her
[Page 215]
grey doublet was now elucidated; and I well knew that a story of supernatural horror requires only a sombre outline, which time, and the inventive powers of the human mind, will not fail to fill up with the marvellous and terrific.
“'Tis well that day begins to break,” cried the sable torch-bearer; “for we should have been finely bewildered before we got to Devizes: since the fashion of travelling by night has been taken up by the nobility, there is no rest for us gentlemen of the scarf and hat-band.”
“Suppose they cannot travel by day,” said the other, “what's to be done then? Besides, we need not grumble; for 'tis well known that we make them pay for it in the end.”
“And a pretty end they make,” added his companion. “There's more fuss about one titled carcase, than about twenty wholesome bodies. But all trades
[Page 216]
must thrive; and half the great folks we convey home are better dead than living.”
“How do you make that out?” cried the gloomy inquirer.
“Why, because many of them live ill, and die well,” replied the torch-bearer: “now a poor rascal proves his removal from high blood by the very reverse; for he generally lives well and dies ill. Yet I dare be sworn that yon gibbet bears an honester man than this same corpse of a lord was in his best days.”
“He has left but a queer name behind him,” said the undertaker.
“No matter for that,” replied his companion; “money will buy some folks a character; and I'll warrant his name will be mended, before it appears in our abbey.”
“Money!” cried the undertaker—“why he died worse than nothing.”
[Page 217]
“That was one degree worse than himself,” interrupted the torch-bearer— “But your nobles have seldom much to boast of, except the title which they get from their ancestors, and which goes on to their next heir, with little improvement, and still less honour. Why your lords, now-a-days, only squander their estates at the gaming-table; and while they hang a poor thief for taking a purse on the highway, make no more of picking one another's pockets, than I should do of consigning their bones to the hands of the anatomist.”
“You don't do so much in that way as you formerly did,” cried the torch-bearer.
“The more is the pity,” replied the lacquey of death; “for there is plenty of stuff for experimental work. Most of our modern bodies are terribly disordered about the heart; a leaden surtout cannot add to their coldness, or do
[Page 218]
away the ill effects which such subjects leave behind them. Why my lord here, that is travelling home in our death-cart, has a coffin as thick as a stone-wall. But lead is no uncommon thing for the heads of great families.”
“You are merry, my slow travellers,” said I.
“And yet we have but a sad subject for our mirth,”replied the undertaker.
“It is a pity that the corpse which excites your jocularity, cannot hear you,” said I.
“He would hear what, probably, he never heard in his life,” cried the torch-bearer.
“And what is that?”
“Truth!” answered he. “Your court-born quality, like a certain beast of burden, carry their ears so high, that nothing like reason or good counsel can reach them. They think themselves the lords of their species, and, like the
[Page 219]
ass in the lion's skin, fancy the whole world is astonished at their power, at the very moment that they are the objects of universal detestation.”
“Whose corpse do you bear?” said I.
“Nobody's,” answered the undertaker; “our hearse, indeed, bears the body of Viscount Linbourne.”
“Lord Linbourne!” repeated I, shuddering with horror. “Is not Lord Linbourne yet buried? He has been dead these three weeks!”
“Very true,” said the undertaker; “but he forgot to pay his debts before his departure; and his body was detained for the good of his character.”
“Arrested!” cried I, with a mixture of surprise and indignation. “His miserable remains insulted, to gratify the revengeful malice of his creditors, and in a Christian country! Shame! shame on those laws which authorize such violations of humanity.”
[Page 220]
“How you stare!” said the torch-bearer, proceeding slowly on, as I walked my horse beside him. “Why there have been instances of bodies being detained for a few hundreds, which were covered with scars received in the defence of their country. Nay, more, I once heard of a great man's suffering the corpse of a beautiful mistress to lie on the bare floor, while the bed, on which she died, was sold for the benefit of her creditors 10 .
“Is the circumstance common?” said I.
“God forbid!” replied the trainbearer of mortality; “for if every noble corpse, that died without paying his debts, were kept above-ground, the church-yards would soon be full of undertakers.”
The roads were rendered so deep by
[Page 221]
the torrents of rain, that the cavalcade again halted to let the horses rest, and I made farther inquiries respecting Lord Linbourne. I found that his remains had been arrested at the suit of Lady Emily Delvin, for the sum of six hundred pounds; that, after remaining unburied nearly three weeks, the debt was discharged, and the body ordered for interment by an unknown friend. The latter circumstance surprised me more than the former. An act of persecution from a woman of Lady Emily Delvin's description was not sufficiently singular to excite astonishment; but that an unknown person should lay aside the claim to public praise, and voluntarily rescue the reputation of a departed friend from disgrace, was wonderful indeed! I did not then conceive, that the man who had evinced such noble, such generous sentiments, was no other than my ill-requited patron—Colonel Aubrey!
[Page 222]
It is impossible to describe the reflections which followed this discovery.—Every proof which Colonel Aubrey gave of exalted philanthropy, served as an additional scorpion to sting my bosom with the anguish of compunction. The wretched highwayman, whom I had left that morning, appeared to my selfreproving mind, comparatively innocent, when imagination wandered back through the gloomy labyrinths of time, and pointed out the events which had rapidly followed my footsteps.
I quitted the sable group, and my mind was deeply impressed with the touching solemnity of its appearance.—I stopped at some distance, and looked back, for the last time, towards the vehicle which contained the breathless body of him, who, had I never breathed, might at that moment have been living. The idea was terrible! Yet the destruction of a dissipated mortal—of one
[Page 223]
whose life was employed in every species of tolerated fraud—who existed on the spoils of other men's credulity—and practised every vice with the unblushing effrontery of hardened infamy, was of less importance than the eternal wound which I had given to Colonel Aubrey's repose, by my rash and unprincipled conduct towards Miss Woodford. By the former, the world was rid of an enemy to virtue; by the latter, society lost one of its brightest ornaments, and I the object who was not only entitled to my friendship, but to my unbounded gratitude.
As the sun began to light the summits of the distant hills, the horses moved slowly down a rugged steep, leading from the common. The sky brightened every instant, and the yellow tints of the morning beams, just visible above the horizon, caught the tops of the white plumes, as the hearse descended to
[Page 224]
the valley. I heard the sound of the wheels as they proceeded from me: the rumbling diminished as the distance augmented, till at length I was again left alone on the solitary waste, doubly impressed with melancholy by the scene which I had witnessed. I will leave you to fancy what I in reality experienced at that moment.
CHAP. LXIV. After a few minutes, passed in reflections no less painful than unavailing, I spurred my horse with a kind of impetuous despair, and hastened towards Bath. On my arrival, I committed the landlord's nag to the care of a post-boy, with instructions to convey him back to his master by the first convenient opportunity;
[Page 225]
and immediately ordered a chaise to take me to Bristol.
The acute sensibility of my mind had seldom, in all its varying scenes of probationary suffering, experienced a more severe trial, than that of knowing myself the accessary to a murder. For, whatever the laws of honour, or the customs of society, may hold forth in extenuation of the act, the man who takes the life of a fellow-creature, except in the defence of life, is guilty of murder— tolerated, sanctioned, legal murder! I argue thus—If a man robs me of my purse, I have no right to destroy him, while the laws are in full force to punish such an outrage. If I am cheated of reputation, there are also legal modes of bringing my calumniator to justice: neither have I any right to annihilate my enemy in one case more than in the other. The only excuse which human frailty can urge as a palliation of the
[Page 226]
crime, is that sudden and resistless irritability, which, rushing before our reason, seizes on all its faculties, and claims by violence instantaneous vengeance. In that case the maniac may offer some plea for the man: but the cool-blooded wretch who, calmly, thinkingly prepares the means of annihilating a fellow-creature—who waits with his intellects clear, his reason predominant over the violence of his passions, to destroy a being, who has, perhaps, in a moment of levity offended, is little better than an assassin; and as such should be avoided by every friend to religion and society.
While the horses were harnessing, I strolled towards the North Parade; and the first persons I met were the Duchess of Riversford with her daughters, accompanied by Lady Amaranth and the Duke of Heartwing. As I advanced to join them, they turned from me with an air of insolent contempt, which wounded
[Page 227]
my pride, and at the same time roused my indignation. At a loss how to notice such-conduct without exposing myself to ridicule, for I did not know that people of rank had their days of acknowledgment and their days of total forgetfulness, I entered the Library, and, taking up one of the London newspapers, began to read. The arrogant group soon followed, and, as is the custom with high-bred females, endeavoured to look me into submission—watching my eyes till they encountered theirs, and then suddenly turning with a disdainful sneer towards some other object.
The Library was crowded with unlettered triflers; and every new publication was demanded with an avidity which human politeness had scarcely time to obey. Plays, pamphlets, novels, magazines, and reviews were handed round, and as quickly, with their leaves unopened, returned to the librarian.
[Page 228]
“I am grown to hate novels,” cried the duchess; “the sentimental parts make one melancholy; and the intrigue, which is the only thing that enlivens them, presents nothing but what we all know. Were I to write a book of that kind, I would pourtray my hero from nature.—He should be a solemn pedant without an atom of knowledge, and a man of the world wholly educated in obscurity.”
“How ridiculous!” cried Lady Arabella—“I am sure you cannot call that a portrait from nature.”
“Exactly! absolutely from life!” replied the duchess, looking towards me. “My hero ! methinks I see my hero !”
“But your portrait is full of contradictions,” said Lady Amaranth.
“Therefore the female world will commend it through sympathy,” added the duke.
[Page 229]
“Well, I like my character of all things: I think it perfect,” said the duchess.
“Your Grace is singular in your opinion,” retorted Lady Amaranth.—“Now, were I to draw a sketch from nature, I would select some wild uncultivated boy, who should be a being of my own creating.”
“Nobody questions your ladyship's strength of colouring,” said the duchess; “and as far as experience goes, your chance of success is flattering. But the hero of a novel is not so easily delineated. I detest those mawkish, lovesick animals, who move with uninteresting rapidity through the slender pages of manufactured volumes, produced by the grinding brains of illiterate matrons, for the benefit of the rising generation.—Give me a Werter, or a St. Preux, nay, even a Lovelace, or a Tom Jones; any thing but a Lord Wou'd-be-good or a
[Page 230]
Count Never-wrong. I read a work of this kind the other day, on my journey, merely to beguile time; it was fresh from a modern novel-mill, and strongly recommended by the reviewers; but judge of my surprise, when I discovered whole pages about tinder-boxes and potatoes!—the former without power to kindle a spark of animation—and the latter more unpalatable than moral admonition to a practised gamester.”
The young ladies began to giggle; Lady Amaranth blushed deep vermilion.
“Indeed,” added the duchess, “there was one excuse for the writer, for the avowed her own incapacity, in the preface to her work, and candidly declared that she had not the faintest hope of entertaining her friends. It would be well if all old women were equally honest.”
Lady Amaranth, in order to draw the attention of the circle from herself, and
[Page 231]
to fix it wholly on me, whispered—“'Tis the same—don't you recollect him?”
Still I glanced over the columns of the newspaper, and endeavoured to arm my pride against the impertinence of folly. But human resolution is not permitted to oppose the omnipotence of fashion; and those whom its leading idols do not condescend to applaud, they seldom fail to persecute. The amiable junto, whose pleasure it was at that moment to torment me, taking their chairs near the door, began the attack; while I, unable to escape, for they had completely blocked up the passage, was condemned to seek for amusement in the literary repository.
Finding that their plan of humiliation seemed to lose its subduing qualities, they began to fear that looks would not accomplish their purpose; and the next auxiliary called in to aid them, was that doubtful, teazing, ambiguous, buzzing
[Page 232]
thing—a Whisper; with all its accompaniments of shrugs, smiles, upraised eyes, sidelong glances, and oblique ejaculations calculated to excite curiosity and inflict mortification. I indistinctly heard them pronounce me a murderer, an impostor, a libertine, and a highwayman; yet, though urged on by insults, stigmatized by false reports, persecuted by overbearing arrogance, my pride, reputation, happiness, and forbearance attacked without mercy, and sacrificed without remorse, I had no remedy—because my assailants were persons of distinction!
The Duke of Heartwing, either ashamed of his associates, or fearful that their comments might produce unpleasant consequences, drew nearer and nearer towards the door; and without making the slightest signal of an adieu, in a few moments suddenly vanished. From that period the fair phalanx seemed
[Page 233]
to slacken in resolution. Their eyes were permitted to wander over the various objects which the library presented, and Lady Amaranth rising to borrow the last edition of “Liberal Opinions,” a break was made in the circle, which was soon followed by a complete desertion. I now quitted my seat, and was advancing towards the interior of the library, in order to return the paper which I had borrowed, when I heard Lady Amaranth ask the librarian whether he knew me. “Take care,” said she, “how far you hold any intercourse with him, for he is a very dangerous character.”
“I have seen him with Colonel Aubrey, and think your ladyship must be mistaken,” said the librarian.
“Not at all,” replied Lady Amaranth, “he is suspected of having robbed Lady Emily Delvin. How he escaped punishment Heaven only knows.”
[Page 234]
“It cannot be the same,” said a sensible looking man, who stood near her ladyship; “and, on mere surmise, it is barbarous to calumniate.”
“Nobody knows him,” said Lady Amaranth.
“He is the more entitled to protection from strangers,” said the liberal observer.
“Who is this man?” inquired Lady Amaranth, in a loud whisper, at the same time fixing a vacant stare on my voluntary advocate.
“Mr. Melmoth,” replied the librarian; “the author of many excellent and beautiful productions! a man equally distinguished for genius, and classical acquirements, as for the urbanity of his mind, and the excellent qualities of his heart!”
“I should like to read the productions of so extraordinary a character,” cried Lady Amaranth. “I do not remember
[Page 235]
having met such a one in the circles of fashion.”
“Most likely not,” said Mr. Type, bowing respectfully.
“That modesty which is the associate of genius, obtrudes not itself on those who are incapable of appreciating its value,” said I.
Mr. Melmoth drew back to an obscure part of the library. Lady Amaranth continued:—
“Give me one of his works; I shall want something to-amuse me in the bath to-morrow morning.”
“Your ladyship has already selected one; ‘Liberal’ Opinions.”
“O! Gothic! out of date as much as though it had been printed before the flood! Who will pretend to recommend such antediluvian things as liberal opinions?”
“The Tutor of Truth.”
[Page 236]
“Worse!—a thousand times worse! I would not read such pages to be crowned with wreathes of myrtle. Has he written nothing more suited to the fashionable world?”
“Family Secrets.”
“O Heaven! whose?—Any body's that I know? Delightful!—charming!—give me the first volume,—I will not sleep till I have read it. Are any of my friends in it?—Full of anecdote I dare say.—What a clever creature!—I hope he does not mention me.—I never heard so exquisite a title.—You must present him to me. I never was acquainted with any author, except the Marchioness of Baramberg, and she is so vain of her talents, that there is no bearing her.”
“She has a right to be proud of that which nature has marked with such intrinsic value,” said I. “She is a rare example of exalted beauty, exhibiting the
[Page 237]
honours of illustrious birth, as her secondary claims to the meed of admiration: Her wit, vivacity, accomplishments, and liberal mind, would, in any country except England, render her an object of universal idolatry! and it is to be lamented that she should waste her days in the circles of ignorance and envy, while her rank, and, what I respect beyond all adventitious claims, her talents, would place her in that sphere, elsewhere, which would give celebrity to genius, and dignity to the most exalted situation.”
“Bravo!” cried Mr. Melmoth, whose breast never failed to beat with generous joy, when merit and talents were the subjects of panegyric. His energetic manner and voice pleased me;—and, in a moment, I fancied myself his old acquaintance. There was something like congeniality of opinion, which demanded my attention; and who could so eloquently
[Page 238]
impress the mind with esteem and admiration, as that being, who fastens on the heart by the resistless claims of “ sympathy ?”
CHAP. LXV. A pause of some moments was interrupted by the return of the Duke of Heartwing. Lady Amaranth flew to meet him, and instantly taking his arm, led him towards the interior of the library, where she recommenced her buz of calumny with a new artillery of inquisitive glances. I was preparing to depart, when the idea of flying like a despicable coward arrested my steps, and chained me to the scene of action.
The duke returned to the part of the shop where I still loitered, and with
[Page 239]
a tone of lordly impertinence cried, “Pray don't I know you?”
“That is more than I can answer,” said I, carelessly. “Of one thing I can be certain at least, that I know your Grace.”
“And what may you know of me?” inquired the duke, taking out his snuffbox, and advancing a few steps towards me.
“That which if you knew yourself, would no longer be your characteristic.”
“Will you do me the honour to explain your words, for the edification of this charming circle?” said his Grace, with a supercilious sheer that irritated my feelings.
I am under too many obligations to the Duchess, and Lady Amaranth, to deny them so small a favour,” answered I.
“O! pray let us hear his Grace's characteristic,” said Lady Arabella, “for
[Page 240]
I never knew that the Duke had strength of mind to evince any!”
“Sir, I desire your explanation,” said his Grace of Heartwing, “for I never permit people who are not of my society to take liberties with my name.”
“I dare say not,” answered I, “if you can prevent them. But it is a busy prying world; and those who are placed on an eminence, should be cautious how they excite the curiosity of mankind.”
“Who dares call my conduct in question?” demanded his Grace, growing red with anger.
“Few will take that trouble, my Lord,” answered I, “though many will presume to observe it. The most profound philosophers have been known to watch and examine the labours of an insect.”
“Now for my characteristic,” cried his Grace, in a menacing tone.
[Page 241]
“Arrogance!”
“Puppy,” murmured the Duke.
“Pride!” added I contemptuously.
“Insolent coxcomb!” faintly articulated the man of titles.
“Folly and insignificance!” said I calmly. “Now, my Lord Duke, are you satisfied?”
His Grace, turning towards the Duchess, muttered, “But that he is a vulgar dog, and beneath my resentment, I would crush him to atoms.”
“The fly cannot crush the lion,” said I, “though he may vex and sting him.”
“Well! I protest there is something vastly comical in that remark!” cried Lady Arabella. “I love lions of all things. They are such powerful creatures, and at the same time so noble! I should like monstrously to have a young cub, to educate after my own fashion; only I should be afraid he would
[Page 242]
love me so well, that, some day or other, he would take it into his head to eat me, and that would be vastly shocking and wonderfully savage! would it not?”
“Our sweet poet, Spencer, represents the lion as incapable of offending beauty,” said I.
“O!” exclaimed Lady Arabella, “I remember having the story painted on my fan. Una! the gentle, lovely Una! You have read then?”
The Duchess would have frowned her pretty epitome into silence. But, young as Lady Arabella was, she had already learnt to assert the privilege of her sex, and with infinite good-humour again addressed me:
“Well,” said she, “after all, books are delicious things, though we are so apt to neglect them. I wonder whether there will be any books in another century. It would be monstrous comical if they should be totally exploded.”
[Page 243]
“Heaven forbid!” said I, “that man, so recently enlightened, should again degenerate into ignorance; and, by closing the avenues to reason, recommence the reign of tyranny and superstition.”
“Well, I confess,” cried Lady Arabella, “that I should like of all things to peep out of my grave, and see what my great-grand-children are doing; I dare say affairs will be monstrously changed: men will make caps and puff ribbands; and women forget their sex, to box and ride races.”
“There would be little novelty in the former,”interrupted the Duke, “for the men-milliners already furnish the abodes of gallantry with more fine women than ever embellished a Grand Seignior's seraglio! We connoisseurs in the article of beauty have innumerable causes to commend the innovation; for were the young and the attractive employed in the old-fashioned occupations
[Page 244]
of their sex, we should be half ruined in the pursuit of elegant intrigue.”
“You are monstrously scurrilous!” cried Lady Arabella; “and I cannot think how so savage a creature ever came to be so popular in the circles of refinement.”
“Because he is an adept in deception,” answered the Duchess. “Congeniality, in many instances, proves the strongest magnet of attraction.”
“By Heavens!” exclaimed the Duke, “I speak nothing but mere matter of fact. Plebeian beauty has long overstocked the markets of intrigue, and is now become so plenty that it is of little value. But when a star shines forth in the higher sphere of fashion, every eye is fixed upon it, and every bosom beats to bask in its effulgence. But those who will soar, must pay dearly for their pinions. Ask my friend Lord Liberal whether his attentions to Lady Pennyless
[Page 245]
have not cost him a good twenty thousand! and did not a short excursion to the continent diminish the coffers of a noble dupe, to the tune of nearly that sum.”
“That, nobody will credit,” said Lady Amaranth.
“Except his banker,” interrupted Lady Arabella.
“If elegant beauty is so dearly purchased, how does your Grace arrange your affairs of gallantry?” said the Duchess. “A liberal heart is not one of your most prominent characteristics.”
“I import beauty as I do wine,” answered his Grace; “it comes to me free of duty, from a country where it is no longer saleable.”
Lady Arabella now took up a volume of “The Pupil of Pleasure.”—“What a monstrous pretty title” cried her ladyship; “I should like vastly to read this
[Page 246]
book; one may learn something worth knowing. Pray, Mr. Ainsforth, what novel do you recommend? for, having a very high opinion of your taste, I should like to try something of your selecting.”
“What kind of books does your ladyship like?” said I.
“O! all sorts,” replied Lady Arabella; “but do not desire me to choose any thing tedious; for I never read, but when my femme de chambre is putting my hair in papillots , and that operation seldom lasts more than six minutes.”
“Have you read Mrs. Phantom's last work? It has infinite merit.”
“I read the first page, and did not like it,” said Lady Arabella. “But have you nothing to recommend? reflect.”
“Shall I offer you “The Sorrows of the Heart;” you will find it well
[Page 247]
written, and interesting: its author is a man of enlightened taste and understanding.”
“I don't like the title. I never read books that have not pretty names.”
“My lady writes charmingly herself,” said the librarian. “Her ladyship has lately produced some exquisitely beautiful lines, for Signor Florini; and it is quite the fashion to sing them in all polite circles.
Two stanzas were now handed round the library, and read by the Duke as specimens of the powers of finished education; and, as they are probably destined to grace a page in the voluminous productions of noble authors, I thought them worth the pains of transcribing;— thus:—
[Page 248]
“ Lines, addressed by a young Lady of Fashion to a small green Fly, which had pitched on the left ear of Lady Amaranth's little white barbet, fidelio ; on a summer evening, after a shower , near sunset.
“Little, barb'rous, cruel fly !
Tell me, tell me, tell me why
You to poor Fidelio -bring,
To vex his ear, so keen a sting?
Little, barb'rous, cruel fly,
Haste away, or you must Die !
“Soft!” I hear Fidelio say,
Do not send the fly away:
Let him hover round and round,—
Let him, let him, let him wound ;
Lest the little rogue should sip
Honey , from my lady's lip !”
This extraordinary effort of exalted genius was received by the noble auditors with enthusiastic wonder and applause,
[Page 249]
while every individual solicited to have a copy.
Lady Amaranth ordered the librarian to get one hundred immediately struck off on white satin, with painted emblematical margins, as presents for her friends. “I do not mind what they will cost,” cried her ladyship, “if they are but truly elegant, so as to render the decorations worthy of the poetry. Now let me choose the type. Have you any thing very curiously printed? Mind that you put all the sublime passages in capital letters, and all the neat points in Italics. It will excite great curiosity in the fashionable world, and Lady Arabella's fame will make all your living poets expire with envy. You must take care to get it handsomely reviewed. Consider, it is the production of no vulgar pen;—people of rank do not often embellish the literary sphere with such brilliant constellations.”
[Page 250]
“For once,” said the Duke, “the doves of Venus will be crowned with the laurels of Apollo!”
Lady Arabella's cheek glowed with conscious rapture!
“Now let us choose the type,” interrupted Lady Amaranth.
A small collection of poems, written by a man of real genius, then in prison for debt, was handed to her ladyship.
“This,” said the librarian, “is a work of infinite merit. A second volume, now in the press, will be published by subscription; the sum only half-a-guinea.”
Lady Amaranth threw the book aside;—Mr. Melmoth took it up, and instantly whispered the librarian to shew him the list of subscribers. It was produced,—and we looked it over together. Mr. Melmoth set down his name for four sets, and I followed his example.
[Page 251]
Lady Amaranth said, she never subscribed to any thing of the kind, except it was dedicated to herself; and the librarian replaced the list upon the shelf, with a sigh, and a glance at me, conveying the sentiment which he was too prudent to utter.
Lady Amaranth again repeated her charge that the poem of Lady Arabella's writing should be superbly printed; the satin of the richest quality; and each copy bound in pink velvet, embroidered with the arms of her family. “You will take care about the reviewing, in case the charming morceau should be pirated: remember, that it was written by a person of distinction, who has it in her power to repay a civil thing, and that handsomely. You understand me.”
The librarian bowed and smiled.
“I shall leave the direction of the whole business to you, Mr. Type,” continued her ladyship, “for I shall set out
[Page 252]
towards London to-morrow. I have promised Lady Fubsy and Mrs. Casino to assist them in finishing Mrs. Lyric's comedy.”
“Does your ladyship write?” said the librarian, with evident surprise.
Lady Amaranth laughed:—“O no! Heaven forbid!” cried she; “I have more elegant and more interesting occupations, believe me. What I call finishing a comedy is quite another kind of thing. We who govern in the higher spheres always finish those plays which attempt to ridicule our leading refinements. By finishing a piece, we mean putting an end to it. A few pounds distributed in the galleries, added to our own strong and invincible phalanx, will at any time set a theatre in an uproar.”
“But if you banish scenic ridicule from the stage, will not the pen of the satirist meet you on other ground? Does not the liberty of the press present a
[Page 253]
thousand avenues for just and natural retaliation?” said I.
“Name one,” said Lady Amaranth, rather piqued at the observation.
“The diurnal prints,” answered I. “They are not so easily bought over to the service of unjust condemnation. Their conductors are, in general, men of liberal education. Some indeed are highly distinguished for literary abilities, and classical knowledge.”
“The daily papers are too cheap,” said the Duchess of Riversford; “their price should be raised above the pockets of the vulgar. What right have the canaille to know the transactions of the upper world?”
“That right which is the scourge of overbearing licentiousness,” answered I; “which raises the bulwark of freedom above the chaos of folly and deception, and illumines the low hovel of honest industry, equally with the loftiest abode
[Page 254]
of pride and dissipation. Heaven forbid that the time should ever approach when that source of public information, which has so long been the pride of Englishmen, shall be closed and annihilated! when the country at large, from the palaces of princes to the meanest habitations of laborious honesty, shall be deprived of that luminary, whose power, while it expands the thinking faculties, protects those rights of which every honest mind should be tenacious.”
Lady Amaranth made no reply: the Duchess sauntered towards the door: the Duke hummed an opera air; and Mr. Melmoth, by a nod of approbation, flattered my feelings more than a thousand bows from a thousand titled heads would have done. It was an honourable tribute from a man of worth and talents: as such, I knew and felt its value.
[Page 255]
“Well!” sighed the Duchess, after a short pause of reflection, new and unpleasing to her Grace's mind, “I really think that some law should be made to rescue people of rank from the animadversions of impertinent scribblers. It cannot be of any consequence to the lower orders of people how we pass our time.”
“Your Grace will pardon me for differing in opinion,” said I; “but while the people suffer every inconvenience through the evil example set them in the higher spheres of life, the reasoning mind has a right to observe and to condemn it. While every virtue is exploded from the habitations of the exalted, vice acquires an ascendancy which undermines the morals of the community, and which must, in time, annihilate the bonds of civilized society. For, after all, the only sure foundation of those laws, which cement a people
[Page 256]
and form a kingdom, is moral rectitude: take from the mind a sense of shame, and you open to the passions every avenue which leads to the destruction of order, domestic peace, constitutional allegiance, and social amity.”
“You are a profound reasoner,” said his Grace; “but it is the province of the populace to rail at the exalted. The privilege which the laws allow to subjects is too extensive—it only makes the little insolent, and irritates the great to new acts of persecution. We always treat impertinent admonition with contempt.”
“Very possibly,” said I; “but the ear which is deaf to the soft murmur of a breeze, may be startled by the howling of a tempest. Nature will be heard; and the voice of truth may triumph over the apathy of folly, when its victory is the least expected.”
[Page 257]
“Thank Heaven that we are placed upon an eminence that sets every assailant at defiance,” said the Duchess.
“There again the dull and arrogant mind misleads itself,” answered I;— “there is no eminence which reprehension cannot reach—no shield which the shaft of ridicule cannot penetrate. The higher the objects of contempt are placed, the surer they become marks for the observing multitude; for
'Tis in their greatness their conviction lies.
Unseen the sweetest low-born buds decay;
But the proud cedar, tow'ring on the rock,
Stands like a landmark to attract men's eyes;
And tho' it shares the bright meridian blaze,
It cannot 'scape the pelting of the storm.”
“That may be very fine, and very poetical,” said Lady Amaranth; “but the personal consequence of nobility is not to be depreciated by the attacks of the vulgar.”
[Page 258]
The vulgar are not the people who comment on the enormities of fashionable vice,” said I; “those who presume to observe and to condemn are as far from the lower orders of society as from the elevated circle of a court. The outrages committed by some whose rank renders them doubly conspicuous, are felt by all descriptions of persons; for their pernicious example, spreading like a contagious disease, descends even to the lowest habitations, and contaminates those minds which have not reflection to resist it. The nobleman who keeps a public gaming-table, and the tame and sordid fool who tacitly winks at his wife's depravity, are noxious weeds that poison the very source of civilized order, and make nature shudder at the innovations of licentiousness: can such a man be astonished if his lacquey robs him?—or such a woman complain if her female epitome imitates the vices of her mistress,
[Page 259]
even at the expence of every domestic comfort? I have indeed heard of even more horrible violations of those decencies which harmonize society; instances where the nearest connections of propinquity have proved no bar to the indulgence of a criminal attachment. I have also been informed, that a titled libertine, who in his days of poverty was supported by a lovely, generous woman, after her bloom of youth was faded, and his vanity completely satiated, forgetting all the pure sensations of gratitude and honour, completed his plan of triumph and duplicity, by marrying her daughter! But the career of infamy was of short duration—the unblushing profligate closed the scene of folly with his life; and left not a bosom that bestowed a single sigh, nor an eye that dropped a tear to consecrate his ashes.”
“Every man has a right to please himself,” said his Grace of Heartwing.
[Page 260]
“Such is the doctrine of overbearing pride,” said I; “but every man has not a right to destroy the happiness of another. And however the exalted offender may fancy himself secure beneath the robe of nobility, he is not concealed from the open and ever watchful eyes of public observation. The voice of truth is expelled from the chambers of our rulers.—The man who dares be honest is deemed an enemy—a bold officious fool; while panders, knaves, and sycophants, men without honour, and women without shame, hang round their sinking victims till they ingulph them. Let those who wish to bask in the smiles of public favour, who seek the distinctions of popularity, and the graced affections growing from the pure and feeling heart, associate with chosen friends— picked from the neglected tribes of enlightened and honourable men, who are too proud to flatter, and too honest to
[Page 261]
deceive. For, however greatness may exalt the brow, and keep the multitude at a distance, the most powerful of the human race, in these momentous times, are men of letters , not men of titles :—those who can guide the pen , and influence the country by the genuine language of truth and philanthropy; not the trifling, fawning, dissipated idiot who, like the noxious weed, twines round the most thriving tree, and while it seems to decorate its trunk, destroys it.”
“I do not comprehend you,” said her Grace.
“The idea is by no means hypothetical,” answered I; “the convulsions of regenerated France are like the contending symptoms of vitality where the object has been benumbed by suspended circulation. The ears of princes in the atmosphere of Versailles were deaf to supplicating merit: their hearts were closed against suffering talents, by a petrifying
[Page 262]
torpidity, and their minds contaminated by false and vicious counsellors,—till nature shuddered at their injustice, and reason nerved her arm to scourge them. Every neglected man of genius became the enemy of despotism; every exalted son of illustrious intellect flew to the standard of tremendous retribution. The sinking phalanx then would have employed those energies to save them, which, before, they had despised—would have offered smiles and honours to secure their favour! But the supplication came too late—for virtue was roused from the apathy of custom, and insulted reason triumphed over the ravages of infamy.”
“You do not pretend to say that there are no distinctions in the human race?” said Lady Amaranth.
“Mental distinctions there certainly are,” answered I: “but setting aside the innate qualities of the heart, the prince and the peasant more nearly resemble
[Page 263]
each other, than your ladyship will readily believe. Take the offspring of the noblest parent, and the hovel-born child of adversity—educate them with equal liberality—and the chance is even, that the one exhibits all the attributes of reason, all the graces of illustrious virtue, as proudly as the other. Yet the most enormous vices are not practised by the humble orders of the community, even with all the disadvantages of low birth and education.”
“Well! I protest I never heard such doctrine!” interrupted the Duchess.
“Most likely not, Madam,” said I; “Your Grace's beauty has made many idols! but even the temple of divinity has been profaned by daring impostors, and its truths been violated for purposes of fraud: yet, trust me, time will shew that nature's pure and simple doctrine touches the heart, while ostentatious folly sickens and disgusts it.”
[Page 264]
“It can be of no great consequence what the world thinks, or what men can write,” cried Lady Amaranth, yawning.
“Pardon me,” said I, “if I venture to affirm that, had not such men as Rousseau and Voltaire existed, the earth had still been shackled by tyranny and superstition. Does your ladyship suppose that this little island is exempt from the rest of the habitable globe? and that, while philosophy beams far and wide on other nations, we alone shall vegitate in the glooms of ignorance? The embryo blossoms of genius cannot long lie dormant; and if any thing will quicken their expansion, it will be the shameless neglect which has too long condemned them to oblivion.”
“Can the world complain that genius is not adored and cherished, while its admiration is directed towards this lovely example?” cried the Duke, addressing the young poetess.
[Page 265]
Lady Arabella wore her newly-woven laurels with becoming dignity; while his Grace of Heartwing, with a polite oath, pronounced her ladyship the most sublime and finished poet of the present century.
Again her wonderful production became the topic of conversation.
“How beautifully harmonious is the second line of the first stanza!” cried Lady Amaranth—“The repetition of words is so neatly, and at the same time so poetically arranged—nothing can be sweeter! Which is your Grace's favourite line?” addressing the Duchess.
“Why, I think the fourth line of the second part—it conveys such natural and interesting acquiescence.”
“Her Grace speaks from sympathetic feeling, authorised by experience,” cried the Duke. “Now, for my part, the idea which most pleases me is the honeyed lip! the very thought thrills
[Page 266]
through my heart, and melts it like new-fallen snow.”
“I deny the similitude,” interrupted her Grace—“new-fallen snow is both cold and pure .”
“How can my heart retain either of those qualities in your Grace's service?” replied the Duke, with his accustomed gallantry and good-nature.—“But which line does the fair poetess think the most beautiful?”
Lady Arabella looked earnestly at me, and with a bewitching smile, equally expressive of caution and vivacity, replied—“The last line of the first stanza.”
I comprehended her meaning—obeyed—and instantly departed.
[Page 267]
CHAP. LXVI. On my return to the inn, I found that, the chaise had been waiting some time; and I immediately set out for Bristol.— The night was particularly dark, and my spirits, labouring under a painful depression, cherished such melancholy thoughts as seemed to deepen the gloomy hour of travelling. A thousand sad and desponding projects by turns took possession of my mind; and the long-meditated plan of self-annihilation seemed to predominate over every other. The caprice of fortune had wearied me into disgust, which rendered life scarcely worth preserving. I looked round the world—I beheld virtue and genius oppressed, and destined to encounter every humiliation, while vice
[Page 268]
and ignorance reared their unblushing heads, and smiled as they abjured all the sympathies of nature. When I compared the liberal, the amiable child of sorrow, with the herd of titled and exalted profligates—when I beheld the eye of genius dimmed with the tear of adversity—was it singular that I should turn from the scene with horror, and wish for repose—even in the oblivion of the grave?
Amidst all the varying conflicts of a perturbed imagination, I still loved Isabella. It seemed to be my destiny that the enthusiastic fondness of my heart should augment, in proportion as she repaid my attachment with indifference or scorn. This may be folly; it may be weakness bordering on idiotism; it may be a mean and despicable want of pride and fortitude: I shall leave wiser heads and colder bosoms to decide the point, while I, from long and fatal experience
[Page 269]
—from nights of rumination and days of unceasing agony, pronounce it Nature. The human mind seldom relinquishes a pursuit wherein self-love is the predominating spring of action. All the vanity of the heart is roused to subdue that which presumes to resist its wishes; and we are unwilling to relinquish a shadow of success, lest we betray our want of power, though the accomplishment of our enterprise promises little happiness to reward us for our labour.
Poor Amelia! often did her destruction press upon my aching heart—and never without leaving a deepened wound to torture it. Her mild and soothing virtues—her sympathizing bosom, ready to participate in every pang which fortune could inflict—her noble, her disinterested friendship, at a moment when the world forsook me, and the horrors of poverty and sickness added new force
[Page 270]
to the fever of despair, crowded on my exhausted mind, and robbed it of every hope which reason might have cherished. She had sacrificed all that was dear to propriety for my sake—she had relinquished the smiles of fortune, the protection of her family, the admiration of the virtuous, and the prospect of repose. How did I requite her kindness?—I abandoned her like a coldbosomed determined libertine; rejected her generous and feeling heart, and left it to feed the scorpion of compunction, while I pursued a phantom that was perpetually flying from me.
Reflection told me that Miss Woodford was, in personal attractions, equal to Isabella—for mental charms no less distinguished —in affections more attaching to any reasonable mind—in all the graces of truth, unvarnished sensibility, heroic friendship, infinitely superior. Then wherefore did I shrink from the one, and
[Page 271]
blindly persevere in idolizing the other? Because I was the dupe of my own passions, an alien from reason, the slave of early impressions, and the pupil of resistless nature.
I set out on my journey through life with a bosom aching under the pressure of unkindness. As my mind expanded, I progressively learnt to discriminate betwixt the homage which venal minds pay to powerful unworthiness, and the cold applause which merit meets with in the busy varying paths of human trial. I found that the natural passions implanted in the breast of man were too often terribly triumphant over the sober dictates of reason and reflection, and that the gratification of those passions would inevitably involve their victim in ruin and disgrace; yet I had not strength of mind to vanquish the strong hand of Nature, which, in spite of every opposing power, propelled me on to
[Page 272]
errors:—let me not soften the appellation, let not the sophistry of self-extenuation lay the “flattering unction” to my soul, but suffer me, O mild and sympathizing monitress! to call them crimes. Yes, I am a criminal—an involuntary criminal. But I begin to find the iron shield of defiance growing over my breast; I begin to hate my oppressors. Persecuted by my fellow man, can I be less than a misanthropist?—The overbearing insolence of pride dissolves the social bonds of life, and engenders all the ills that deform the human mind, while every avenue to the heart is by degrees closed against affection, pity, and compunction. Can a creature whom the world incessantly persecutes, who is the very make-game of fortune, whose bosom, tempest-beaten by adversity and wrung by sorrow, experiences neither the compassion nor the kindness of his species—can he be
[Page 273]
expected to love those beings who destroy his hopes, and cast him, like a ship-wrecked sufferer on a stormy shore, to wither his youth in sadness, or in despair to perish?—Impossible. It is man alone that forms the misanthrope; he arms himself against his brother man, and then wonders at the courage that resists him. Had I found either friendship, virtue, or humanity in my intercourse with the exalted, I might, like a feather, have been borne along by every breath, and at last have glided, pleased, down the stream of folly to oblivion. But those who are greatly injured, have a right to be strongly indignant. If knaves and villains are to pass through the dark variety of successive crimes— to ingulph others, and to escape themselves —where is the justice of mankind? and what are the bonds that harmonize society?
[Page 274]
I had frequently mediated suicide, and, with all its horrors, all its criminality, I could not divest myself of that longing after death, which could alone terminate a life of unmitigable sorrow; for to whatever point my weary eyes were directed, the prospect teemed with misery. My spirit, by nature restless, perpetually wandered back to scenes of persecution, and time presented no oblivion to the retrospect, but the darkness of a sepulchre. Could I restore Colonel Aubrey's peace of mind—Amelia's reputation—Lord Linbourne's life?—Impossible. Then where was I to hope for happiness?—in age and apathy? Could I look forward to enjoyments, when the finer powers of sensation became extinct? Would not my disastrous fortune urge me on to an accumulation of crimes? and was it not virtue to shake off a being, which would either become a curse to society,
[Page 275]
or a terrible example of offended justice?—I had once cherished, with horrible delight, the hope of destroying Sir Sidney Aubrey; I had, in fancy, violated Isabella's honour:—Amelia was the victim;—she lived to breathe forth the perpetual sigh of torturing reproach, and I was still defeated in the gratification which revenge had meditated on my rival. These were my hourly ruminations. Ah, Rosanna! such is the exile whom you honour with your friendship. Such are the confessions of a being, whose infant mind was contaminated by prejudice, and who, taught to hate mankind before he was capable of discriminating the difference betwixt the graces of virtue, and the deformities of vice, considered the vicissitudes of fate as individual persecutions, which human feeling was bound to oppose, and resisting strength to punish. The basis of philosophy is an universal love
[Page 276]
of our species; the mischiefs of jealousy, resentment, pride, revenge, and hatred, set its precepts at defiance, while they nourish all the miseries of life, and render the thinking creature, man, scarcely one degree less savage than the tiger which he shrinks from.
It was near midnight when I arrived at Bristol. I stopped the chaise at Mr. Randolph's door, and knocked with an impetuosity which clearly demonstrated the impatience of my mind: but how shall I describe my chagrin when the servant informed me that Mr. Randolph had, early in the morning of the same day, set out for Glenowen? I had taken a solemn oath never to visit my native mountains during the lifetime of Lady Aubrey, and my disappointment was unutterable. There was nothing to be done but to return to Bath; and, as soon as fresh horses could be procured, I set out to re-measure my tedious
[Page 277]
journey. The irritation of my mind was in no degree abated by this new source of vexation: I added the perplexing event to the long catalogue of my misfortunes, and the only idea which rendered them supportable was that of their speedy termination.
As soon as I entered the inn at Bath, I hastened to my apartment, where I wrote the following
SONNET.
O busy World ! since ev'ry passing day
   Unfolds new scenes of agonizing woe;
   Say, whither shall the child of mis'ry go?
Where seek, mid thorns, one flow'r to deck his way?
My stormy hour presents no cheering ray;
   For me, no summer morn shall proudly glow:
   Round my chill'd heart the winds of winter blow,
While fainting Hope but lingers to decay.
Oh, barb'rous World! why from my bleeding breast
   Bid peace, with all the pure affections, fly?
While round my couch, Despair, in horrors drest,
   From my torn heart extorts th' eternal sigh.
Bid me, oh! bid thy trembling victim rest,
   For since 'tis hell to live—'tis Heav'n to die!
[Page 278]
By the time I finished the effusion of despair, the morning was far advanced, and the house was perfectly still. I threw myself on my bed, and passed an hour in meditation; the result of which was terrible to remember. I felt assured that existence had no joys in store for me, and I resolved to perish. My pistols were loaded; my mind disordered by the frenzy of despair. I rose, and advanced towards them:—I stopped;—the blood seemed to recoi! from my heart. I ventured another step;—the abbey clock struck four, and again all was silent. Thou solemn tongue of Time! thought I, when next thy deep vibrations steal from their antique towers, I shall be at rest!—this feverish brain will for ever cease to ache! this heart, this proudly throbbing heart, will freeze to the very centre!
I was now within a step of the table. I shuddered not while I fixed my eyes
[Page 279]
on the instruments of death: I stretched forth my hand; it did not tremble. “The deed,” said I, “is repugnant to nature—but I am an outcast; for me the world has neither comfort nor affection. I have been buffeted by the storms of fortune, wounded by the arrogant, neglected by the proud; the object dearest to my heart has inflicted on that heart—a wound, which time can never cure. Then wherefore should I live?”
I was roused from my reverie of sadness by a rustling sound in the adjoining room. I hesitated, and listened; but hearing nothing move, again returned to the table. Presently a bell was rung, and a lamp called for. As it entered the apartment, I perceived a small window over the door of my chamber, while a faint voice demanded, “Who sleeps in the next apartment?”
[Page 280]
“A strange gentleman,” replied the female servant of the house. “I don't knaw his name, but in the morning I'll ax.”
“It is of little importance,” said the feeble inquirer, with a faint and tremulous tone. “I only believe that the person is mad, by his strange and incoherent language; indeed I thought I knew his voice. Do you not remember to have heard his name?”
“Naw, my lady. But he's a lord— that I be zure on.”
“Then I was mistaken,” said the lady; “but that he is out of his senses is most certain: I have not been able to close my eyes since he entered his chamber.”
“Zure!” exclaimed the chamber-maid; “you don't tell me zo. Why you must knaw, that when I lit him to his room, I thought a zeem'd to look mighty creazed. His eyes be as wild
[Page 281]
as our tabby cat's, and his cheek as pale as the very sheets. I think a is bezide himzelf, zure enough. Poor zaul! I've a great mind to bide at his door all night; for a zeems quite a quality parson, and I a-bin told, that your quality be terrible apt to make away we themselves. Dear lack! I shou'd never be able to bide in the house for fear of his haunting it. I wish I cou'd do any thing to keep him from zuch dismal ways for he is too comely a gentleman to be let die, if one knaw'd how to save'n.”
“You increase my alarm!” said the lady; “your description convinces me that he is a maniac.”
“O Lord-a-mighty!—a what?—I never zeed zuch a thing in all my born days!” cried the girl. “I took'n for a gentleman, and a look'd for all the world just like one. Shall I call up measter?”
[Page 282]
“I dare say he is a gentleman,” said the fair invalid, faintly; “but he may, nevertheless, be a maniac.”
“Zure!” exclaimed the girl; “who wou'd-a-thought it? What's to be done?—Do-'e think that I could do any thing to quiet'n? I shall be very willing, God knows!—No quality parson that ever tarried at our house can zay that I refused to do whatever they axed me.”
“I dare say you are very obliging,” cried the lady.
“Ees, zure; I be always agreeable and complying.”
“Then examine whether the door is fast, leave your light upon the hearth, and I will endeavour to sleep,” said the invalid.
“Ben't-e a-fear'd to bide alone?” cried the girl; “and zo near the whatd'ye -call-um gentleman?—You can't think how terrible scared a look'd!—
[Page 283]
the wicked-one is often busy with quality fokes, and who do knaw but a-may break in, and behave ungenteelly or zo!—I should be mazed, and that's the truth on't, if 'twere I—but you knaw best what pleases you, and I be always agreeable.”
I placed a chair near the door of communication, and, raising myself upon it, endeavoured to get a view of the lady, whose voice awakened my curiosity. “Hush! do'e but harken!” said chambermaid. “As zure as I be living, he's agwain to hang himself. Lord-a-massey upon us! what a rumpus there will be in the house, if such a pretty gentleman should make away with himself. Then a-wou'd be buried in the cross roads, with a stake drived through un.”
The idea made me shudder with horror.
[Page 284]
“And then he'd be only made game on for his pains; for the world never pities fokes that are bezide themzelves.”
That's true, thought I. She continued—
“Perhaps he be in love?—poor zaul!—Well, if his sweetheart proves false, a may perhaps find another that will make him amends for it. You can't think what a comely gentleman a his—a little sun-burnt or zo; but his eyes be as black as a sloe, and he is as tall and as straight as a may-pole: and yet for all that, I war'nt he'd be forgot just as zoon as an ugly-body. Nobody would care a pin about him, because a-was so foolish as to kill himself for love; a thing that every body laughs at now-a-days. Then what wou'd a-get by it? why, he'd go to the wicked-one, and there'd be an end of'n!—'T would be time enough to go to the next world
[Page 285]
when a gets old and ugly: don't you think zo, ma'am?—I'm zure I do.”
The lady, by her silence, had fallen into a slumber—the girl continued—I listened.
“Besides, ma'am, it would be zo pigeon-hearted, and zo wicked at the seame time: and then the place where a would be buried, like a dog as one may zay, would be troubled with his ghost, as zure as I be living; and 'twou'd be talked on time out a mind, and nawbody would go by the road after dark, it wou'd be zo unkid; for country-vokes be sometimes terrible frightful. There's nawbody more timersome than I; and I shou'd be sorry to be frightful for zuch a comely looking gentleman—that's the truth on't. Dear me, if I cou'dn't cry my eyes out, only but to think what wou'd become of'n, if a was to take to despurt ways.”
The lady still remaining silent, her attendant, who was young and handsome,
[Page 286]
advancing towards a table on which stood a dressing-glass, and viewing her countenance with evident admiration, resumed her comments, while she gratified her vanity.
“Then, ma'am, you knaw,” said she, still looking at herself, “vokes will think that a-has done zomething terrible wicked, and was glad to rid himself of life for fear of the justices; and if he has got any kinsfolk or acquaintances, why they'd be ashamed to own that a belong'd to um. So a wou'd go to the bad place, and lose his character, and all for nothing; while the whole world, with his false-hearted sweetheart into the bargain, wou'd laugh and snicker at'n for a great foolish ninnyhammer.”
This was Nature's reasoning, and on me its impression was certain. Every word sunk deep into my heart; all the lore of wisdom, all the sophistry of
[Page 287]
schools, could not have poured persuasion into my mind like that which fell from the tongue of this simple moralist. Yes, thought I, I should be stigmatized as a fool, a coward, a despicable criminal. The world would laugh at me—my friends, if I have any, would condemn me—Isabella would triumph—and, as soon as my mangled remains were marked with ignominious violence, my name would either be forgotten, or my crime remembered with abhorrence; all that this artless girl had prophesied would, in the space of a few short weeks, be realized. The voice of reason speaks through the soul-enchaining organs of resistless truth; a child of Nature evinces that the polish of education, like the touch of the lapidary, by giving too fine a lustre, sometimes destroys the gem it seeks to embellish: for we have known many examples, where deep and laborious
[Page 288]
mental toil has enervated the reasoning faculties, by overcharging the labyrinths of thought; while a moderate share of learning has called forth that flame which animated the bosom of a Shakespeare! and roused, to daring intrepidity, the lofty spirit of a Cromwell.
CHAP. LXVII. The pretty chambermaid continued near the dressing-table; and I had, from the situation in which I placed myself, a perfect and distinct view of her features as they were reflected in the glass before her: they were exquisitely beautiful. A box of rouge stood near her hand. After looking several times towards the bed, to observe that the curtains were quite closed, she with trembling
[Page 289]
caution deepened the fine tint of her cheek, while she contemplated the fancied improvement with evident approbation. A lady's riding-hat, adorned with white feathers, was the next object of trial; and a deep drawn sigh seemed to declare her longing for those ornaments, which would not have lent an additional charm to the loveliness of nature.
After passing several minutes in silent contemplation, during which her countenance assumed a variety of expression not easily described, she stole towards the bed and listened. On her return to the table, every thing that lay scattered about was curiously examined, not without frequent glances at the object which the mirror still presented. A train of reflections stole across my mind. Poor, pretty, painted fly! thou art like the insect which hovers round the flame that kills it, thought I. Thou longest at this
[Page 290]
moment to revel in the full splendor of those vanities, which would inevitably destroy thee. Thou hast no rank, no exalted shield to protect thee from the taunting world; no privilege to violate the decencies of life; no gold to purchase praise; to silence truth; or to hire assassins, who may crush thy enemies. Thy pure unpractised heart would shrink at persecution; and thou would'st, being poor and unprotected, perish beneath the insults of unpitying enemies.
While I was absorbed in these reflections, the lady, who was concealed from my view by the closely drawn curtains, sighed deeply. Her pretty, but inquisitive attendant stole softly towards the door, and, after sliding the hat upon a chair, was making her escape, when my unlucky physiognomy met her eye. Before I had time to descend, she hastened to the other side of the bed, and shrieked most vehemently: the lady joined in the
[Page 291]
terrifying sounds, and in a few minutes the whole house was awakened.
“A ghost! a ghost!” exclaimed the affrighted girl. “The ghost of the what-d'ye-call-um gentleman! I zaw it we my awn eyes. A looked at I as bitter as thof a wou'd kill a-body! Nobody knaws the reason but I. Dont-'e ax me! dont-'e ax me!” Again she shrieked, while several persons, who had rushed into the room, desired her to explain her meaning.
“Oh! I zed a-wou'd walk, I zed a-wou'd trouble the house!” cried she. “A was as white as church wall, and as tall as the steaple!—Never zure zince I comed from Devonshire did zuch a mortal fright appear before I. I shall never rest in my bed, that's zure! for I hadn't the heart to ax'n what a wou'd ha with I; and I knaw that the ghost had zummut to zay, or a-wou'dn't a walk'd, that's for sartin. Dont-e awp'n
[Page 292]
the door!—dont-e, if ye bean't out of your wits. Who knaws what a may do if one angers him!”
“Whom, and what do you mean?” cried a strange voice. “Dish my jasey, you're quizzing us. Stop your gab, and tell us, what's the fun now?”
“O! 'tis naw fun, your honour my Lord,” replied the chambermaid; “'tis all as true as the Gospel: if I be alive I zaw his ghost! The lady can tell-e what a-was; she calld'n by a strange out-of-the-way neam. I can't bring it to mind: but, as zure as I was born, I zeed'n with my awn eyes.”
“So I suppose, if you saw him at all,” interrupted the interrogator; “but leave shamming, and talk so that one may understand you. I do not believe in ghosts.”
“O! dont-ezay zo,—dont-e, if you ha'n't a mind to bring un back again. God A-mighty vorgi' me, for I did
[Page 293]
provoke'n, that's the truth on't. If a-had a mind to hang himzelf, what was that to I? I had naw business to be meddling and meaking with other vokes troubles, not I. I tould the lady that a-was mazed, when a-comed to our inn; and she was of the zame way o'thinking. The Lord-a-massy on his poor zaul! for as zure as I be living, the wicked one has got'n.”
On hearing me try the door of communication, she again began to shriek.
“Why, dash my wig, you scream like a peacock! You have dinned the drum of my ears, till I cannot hear my own voice,” said the stranger.—The girl continued:—
“Awver the door! awver the door! we two eyes like the lanterns of the male coach; and a mouth for all the world like the geats of our abbey! There did I zee un, or I bean't alive. Well, God A-mighty forgive I! I had
[Page 294]
naw business to backbite the poor zaul, that's zure enough! thof I knaw'd that a-wou'd make away we a-self the moment I zet eyes on-un: a-look'd as 'twere betwattled.”
“Quiz me, but you're a queer one!” said the stranger; “where did you learn your gab? Why you may as well explain the business in Greek or Hebrew, as in the twaddling language you adopt. Why you have been knawing and zawing this half hour, and not got through your story after all.”
Finding that the curiosity which this simple girl would excite, could not fail to procure me a visit from her hearers, I passed by another door which communicated with the staircase, and presently joined the group. On entering the room, I perceived the chambermaid sitting on the ground, surrounded by several persons collected from all parts of the inn, and a more grotesque assemblage
[Page 295]
never inspired the pencil of a caricaturist. At the fight of me, her shrieks grew louder than ever, till she fell into a sit of hysterics, and became wholly ungovernable; while to my infinite astonishment I found that the person whose voice had last addressed her, was the young nobleman whom I had met in the watch-house, on the first night of my arrival in London. The situation in which I had then seen him totally precluded the possibility of his recollecting me, though his features were instantly recognized on my entering the apartment.
As soon as the first impression of astonishment subsided, and the terrified girl began to recover her senses, I felt an unaccountable longing to peep at the lady within the curtains. There was something in her voice, though low, feeble, and scarcely articulate, that awakened more than common curiosity.
[Page 296]
Doubtful whether or not she was connected with any of the persons then present, I waited to hear what they would say when the girl became reconciled to my appearance. The whole group was preparing to depart, without making the slightest inquiry after the fair invalid, whose silence convinced me that she wished to remain unnoticed. There is some mystery, thought I, in this taciturnity, and therefore I will be prudent. Still the busy genius which never suffered my imagination to repose, prompted me to discover whom it could be, and what occasioned such extraordinary caution. The trembling chambermaid was led towards her apartment; the group followed; and I was left alone with the silent incognita.
However singular it may seem, the moment I had the power to gratify my curiosity, the inclination subsided. There appeared to be something so indelicately
[Page 297]
obtrusive in the attempt, that I had not resolution to draw back the curtains. That she was alive, there could not be a shadow of doubt; her shrieks were proofs incontestible. That she was silent did not astonish me, because in such a situation, the only way to escape discovery was to avoid every thing that might excite attention. I walked about the room, in hopes that she would speak; but not a syllable did she utter. I advanced towards the bed; again receded; a second time approached a few steps, and recoiled with equal self-reproof. I now ventured to speak, and to express a hope that the silly girl had not alarmed her. Not a word repaid my attentions, and I began to fear that she was dead, when a long-laboured sigh relieved me from the horrors of apprehension.
I paused several minutes, undecided how to act: my longing to obtain a sight of the unknown invalid was scarcely
[Page 298]
to be conquered: yet I knew not how to satisfy my inclination, without the risk of again alarming her; and the certainty that my conduct would be deemed a violation of decorum, insulting to the delicacy of her sex, made me recoil whenever I approached her. I therefore resolved to return to my chamber, and to wait till her hour of rising, when I might with propriety inquire after her health. I examined the door of communication; it had no fastening on my side; she therefore had the power to prevent my re-entering her apartment; but I had still the panes of glass over it, from whence I could see, and convince myself whether I knew her, in case she might refuse me admittance into her presence.
Day-light began to enter through my curtains; and as I bent my eyes on the pistols which lay before me, my heart sbuddered, and my whole frame was
[Page 299]
chilled with a tremor which cannot be described. The interval of reason had subdued the impatience of despair; and I scarcely dared approach that spot on which, only two hours before, I had meditated self-destruction. The momentary frenzy, diverted from its course by a combination of trivial events, had passed away like a summer storm; and the unclouded intellect which succeeded, made me blush at the impetuosity of my passions. So rapid are the transitions of irritable minds; so minute is sometimes the event which determines the fate of mortals, that even on the verge of eternity, when the crisis makes the soul tremble in the conflict, one glimmering ray of reason can destroy the gloomy shadows of despair, and check the hand that is raised to annihilate!
While I stood transfixed and chilled with horror, a murmuring groan awakened my attention. I listened; it was
[Page 300]
repeated. Human resolution could no longer resist the impulse of curiosity, and, on tip-toe, I returned to the adjoining chamber.
CHAP. LXVIII. I Gently drew back the curtain, and, with a degree of consternation which no language can describe, beheld Amelia Woodford pale and entirely senseless! Her eyes were closed; her cheek had lost that beautiful and healthful roundness which exhibited the freshness of youth, when a few weeks back I had beheld her the pride of her family, and the admiration of the fashionable world. She appeared at least ten years older, and so unlike her former self, that had not every feature been indelibly impressed
[Page 301]
upon my mind, I should not have known her. I touched her arm which lay across her bosom; it was as cold as marble; her lips were colourless; she scarcely breathed, and my distress was terrible. I was at a loss to decide, in my own mind, whether she was only in a state of suspended sensation, owing to the fright she had experienced, or absolutely expiring. In either case, I deemed myself accessary to her peril, and throwing myself on my knees near her pillow, gave way to the most distracted self-reproaches.
“Poor, gentle victim of a too generous sensibility!” said I; “am I, at last, destined to close thy eyes in death, and to witness that scene of horror which will consign me to perpetual anguish?” I kissed her pale and icy cheek;—I pressed her listless hand to my aching, severish bosom. “Too surely it was the magnet of unerring destiny which
[Page 302]
drew me hither,” said I, “to receive an awful and decisive punishment for all the agonies which thy gentle heart has suffered!” I rose hastily; I raised her on my trembling arm; her whole frame was powerless. I addressed her in the kindest and most soothing, language; but she heard me not. Expecting every moment that she would breathe her last sigh upon my ungrateful bosom, I raved like a wretch deprived of reason, and cursed my fate in the very bitterness of sorrow.
The found of my voice brought the chambermaid once more to the scene of distress. As soon as she entered the room, I demanded when Miss Woodford arrived; and whether she was alone.
“She comed late last night,” said the girl; “and a young gentleman comed we her.”
“A young gentleman—!”
[Page 303]
“Aye zure. He that you zeed here but just now,” replied the girl. “He is a lord, and a-zeemed mighty fond of the poor young lady, that's the truth on't; and a-zaid that was a-going to Brister bytimes in the morning; zo if you do want to zee my lord, you be lucky to have catched'n. I shall go and call the lady's gentleman? A-do only sleep in next chamber—an I warr'nt he'll come, if I do fetch un, thof I be a little afeard of'n too.”
“Do you know his name?” said I hastily, still supporting Amelia, and watching her death-like features.
“No, but I can ax his walley,—the foreigner gentleman;—I don't fear he.”—
`Fly quickly,” said I, “and mind that you make no mistake;—every moment is precious,—every instant full of danger.”
[Page 304]
“Zure! Well, I'll not tarry; but take care you don't let the poor lady die while I be wanting.”
Away flew the girl, and again I conjured Amelia, if she had the smallest degree of sensation, to answer, and relieve me.—“Dear and gentle friend,” said I, “speak to the unhappy Walsingham.” —A convulsive spasm shook her frame almost to annihilation; for the moment of returning sense was rendered terrible, by the sound of that voice, which she could not but remember with agony.
The simple chambermaid justly believed that no person was so capable of giving her the name of the young nobleman as he who bore it: she therefore thought, that the shortest way of settling the matter was to make him a visit, without farther hesitation; and in a few minutes he entered the chamber. As he approached the bed, Amelia endeavoured
[Page 305]
to speak; but the feeble state of her nerves, and the universal lassitude which possessed her frame, prevented the power of utterance.
“D--- me, this is a good go!” exclaimed the young lord. “Who the devil are you , Sir? and what business have you in this lady's chamber? Come, kennel my keen sportsman—there's no bird for you in this covey;—tip us the go-by—or I shall be apt to shew you the way—dash my jasey.”
I made no answer, but still gazed on Amelia with a mixture of pity and compunction. She frequently raised her languid and feverish eyes towards me; she sighed deeply, and often: a tear rolled down her wan cheek,—and my heart was bursting with conscious agonies. All the pangs of remorse, all the tortures of self-reproof, conspired to drive me frantic:—I snatched Miss Woodford's hand;—I kissed it. A
[Page 306]
feeble pressure convinced me that she was not insensible to my sorrow. She endeavoured to speak, to smile—but the effort was subdued by the interposition of Heaven, and the benign angel was not permitted to bestow on my afflictions the most transient gleam of consolation.
The young nobleman stood like one that was petrified with astonishment.— He looked by turns earnestly at me and at Miss Woodford—At length, with a tone half serious and half jocular, he addressed me—
“Hark ye, my hearty, this won't do, by all that's quizzical. This lady is under my protection, and you must not think to offend her. So you had better be moving, my honest fellow; take yourself off—go it—budge—the road lies before you—straight as your nose.—I don't want to quarrel with you—I hate a row—but you must not remain another
[Page 307]
second in this chamber—unless you have a mind to sport your barking-irons, and finish the thing handsomely.”
“If you have a right to claim Miss Woodford's confidence,” said I—“if she gives you authority to command my absence, I shall depart. But if she will allow me to protect her, your menaces will be of little importance.”
Miss Woodford waved her hand, as if to check the altercation.
“You see, my Lord,” said I, “that this is no place for investigating who has and who has not a right here. In the cause of humanity every man is authorized to follow the dictates of his heart; and I should not deserve to be ranked with my fellow-creatures, were I capable of deserting such a woman, and in such a situation. I—I am the cause of all that Miss Woodford suffers—it is to me that she is indebted for these conflicts of mind, which menace even her
[Page 308]
existence. But I will snatch her from the arms of death—she shall not perish—I will not be her murderer! Look up, Amelia—be comforted—command the wretch who does not deserve thy pity; and let one honourable action, in some degree, prove an extenuation of the folly, the frenzy of his conduct.”
“Oh, Walsingham!” sighed Miss Woodford, as she hid her face upon her pillow.
“Walsingham!” interrupted the young lord, with evident surprise, “queer my caxon! are you Walsingham Ainsforth! Here's a kick-up! Why, old Aubrey is waiting at Bristol to marry little Milly. You played truant, my sly one; and women are not to be cajoled without some shew of spirit, my hearty. I advised her to carry the colonel's knapsack—and she's going to head-quarters under my escort. So strike you colours, and beat up for recruits in some other district—little
[Page 309]
Milly is no match for you, I promise you.”
The spirit of contradiction began to acquire its usual ascendancy over my mind, and the young champion's language only served to augment its powers of resistance. I could not bear his taunting manner; I could not endure the mortification of a refusal from the juvenile protector of Miss Woodford. After a short pause, I replied, with a tone of marked indignation—“Your commands and Colonel Aubrey's claims are very distinct indeed; and I shall as firmly resist the one as I shall hold the other sacred. If Amelia can be happy with my friend—the most worthy and honourable of men! Heaven can bear witness how sincerely I shall exult in her felicity. But if her determination is averse to such an union, my hand, my life shall be dedicated to the promotion of her peace—to the establishment of her future tranquillity.”
[Page 310]
Miss Woodford, raising herself on her arm, feebly articulated “Never!”
“You see that I was right, my hearty,” cried the young lord. “You may hand yourself off as soon as convenient. —So let us adjourn, and drink a bottle of champaign to your speedy conveyance. You seem to be a merry fellow, notwithstanding your wry faces—and nothing settles love like a cheerful glass and a clear conscience. Dash me, what signifies repentance?—the thing is done —Milly is going to patch up the business with the help of a parson; and Aubrey is a d—d fine fellow, and—so there ends the whole matter handsomely. Besides, my little cousin wants rest; she has been piping all the way down to Bath—and devilish ill into the bargain. Let her alone—she'll come about, and all will be right, if you will but be quiet.”
[Page 311]
I soon found by the conversation of the young nobleman that he was no other than Lord Kencarth; the person to whom I had, not long before, offered my services as a travelling tutor. With some persuasions on his part, and many expressive glances from Miss Woodford, I consented to quit the room; we ordered breakfast, for it was near seven o'clock, and in a few minutes retired to another apartment.
Lord Kencarth, notwithstanding his uncouth language, and affectedly knowing manners, possessed a generous, brave, and feeling heart. He had been his mother's darling from his infancy; and her nature was so affectionately gentle, that the labour of her life was uniformly that of gratifying every with which her son could entertain or express. His education had been wholly neglected—his will in every respect unconstrained. He had associated with grooms, been
[Page 312]
flattered by dependants, and, by stepping from the nursery to the stable, was as uncultivated in mind and manners as though he had been born on a desart, and reared to manhood in the society of savages: yet, his bosom was warmed by those liberal affections, which are sometimes aliens to the most polished and exalted individuals: while his heart never failed to sympathize, or his hand to succour the unhappy. If the virtues are the associates of a wild unfashioned nature, let the polished and the proud blush while they contemplate their own deformity!
[Page 313]
CHAP. LXIX. During breakfast we conversed on Miss Woodford's situation: I found that, soon after her return to the house of her mother, she became delirious; and, by the advice of Doctor Pimpernel, was removed to a private mad-house, of which he was the principal proprietor.
The doctor had travelled much, and had tried all professions, in all climates. The conclusions which he drew from experimental knowledge were these—That two-thirds of the breathing race were mad; and that he who could get possession of a patient's mind, was more than half assured of dominion, whether in a state of convalescence or of confirmed insanity. For this reason he set up a mind-mill, where he ground the
[Page 314]
shattered particles of intellect, to his own purpose; and when the produce of his labour promised either reputation or profit, he never failed to promote the one, or to embrace the other. A husband who wanted to have a troublesome wife taken care of —a libertine who wished to provide for a mistress, when the edge of passion became blunted by satiety—or a man of refined taste, who sought to secure unguarded innocence, found infinite advantages in the subduing atmosphere of the all-potent mind-mill.
To this scene of variegated misery Miss Woodford was conveyed, bathed with her mother's tears, and unconscious of her dreary destination; the doctor promised to attend her daily, absolutely forbidding all intercourse with her family or connections.
Mrs. Woodford's confidence in Doctor Pimpernel's professional skill was boundless; she did not recollect that he
[Page 315]
was also skilled in professions ; and that sincerity was not one of the qualities which characterised his mind, in his intercourse with society. That friend whom he “grappled to his heart with hooks of steel” one day—the next he would “cast like a loathsome weed away.” With the little he was the greatest of men; with the great he shrunk into the least! He talked higher and bowed lower than any courtly hater of courts within the atmosphere of political warfare. Like the vanes of a steeple, he soared above every other object, and was perpetually turning to all points without fixing to any. Born in one country, educated in another, a traveller. in a third, and a citizen of a fourth, he had acquired a smattering of every language—a gusto for every folly, a degree of notoriety in all, but a portion of reputation in none. He had written books that nobody read, and related wonders
[Page 316]
which nobody credited. His mind was a sort of salmagundi of Hibernian assurrance, Scottish erudition, Italian shrewdness, Iberian pride, Gallic philosophy, and English apathy—the one perpetually struggling with the other, without either, for a moment, obtaining the ascendancy. Born in Ireland, educated in Scotland, polished in Italy, and bronzed in Britain —he was originally intended for the church; but the circumscribed limits of his theological researches excluded him from the interior of the holy sanctuary, and confined the specimens of his art to the sadly solemn precincts of the churchyard, where innumerable monuments will remain to the end of time, of his industry, skill, popularity, and experience.
Miss Woodford had been confined several days, when the silence of her seclusion was broke in upon by a visit from the Duke of Heartwing; and her
[Page 317]
weary eyes were at length open to all the horrors of her situation. The cold contempt with which she treated his philanthropic visit—for every eccentricity is now honoured with that exalted title —convinced his Grace that her intellects still retained the strong power of discriminating the immeasurable distance betwixt humanity and ostentation. She received him with the marked and unassuming propriety of good-breeding, while he displayed that consciousness of superior rank which chilled her bosom, as the lofty barren summit of Plinlimmon towers above the calm but fertile valley, which displays the gifts of nature, even amidst the glooms that would overwhelm it.
The astonishment and disdain which filled Miss Woodford's bosom was, by her illustrious visitor, mistaken for the timidity of awed respect; while, in proportion
[Page 318]
as she smothered her indignation, he grew great in self-importance, proving the forbearance of suffering worth, when opposed to the pride of adventitious consequence. With kind and sympathising pity the noble visitor lamented her misfortunes, commiserated her situation, and with the same breath, turning to Doctor Pimpernel, ridiculed her sorrow-stricken looks, remarked the ruthless ravages of undeserved affliction, and pompously took his leave, to seek the society of men without feeling, and women without shame! Little did this proud epitome, this breathing picture of exalted life, reflect, that
All outward semblance of attractive grace,
Hereditary splendours, beauty, valour,
Wit, learning, fancy, eloquence divine!
Where godlike, Virtue dwells not in the soul,
May feed upon the vapour Adulation,
And boast an unsubstantial glitt'ring name,
That dazzles only for a fleeting day:
[Page 319]
While innate Glory shall outstrip the grave,
And shine, when all of pageantry and pride
(Like the false meteor on the wings of night)
Shall waste in empty air 11 !”
CHAP. LXX. The visit which Miss Woodford received from the Duke of Heartwing, roused her torpid spirits to a new exertion; she had, previous to her confinement, received a letter from Colonel Aubrey, liberally offering her his hand, and promising to bury her indiseretion in eternal oblivion. This noble and generous conduct may be condemned by the fastidious; but it will not fail to excite admiration in the bosom that is softened by humanity. There are few men, born and educated in the great world, who would take to their arms a
[Page 320]
repentant wanderer, and allow, that a life of sober virtue has power to compensate for the criminality of a single moment: but there are many who will readily resign their domestic treasure to the licentious embraces of another, and even glory in the boast of being wedded to a sanctioned wanton! Which of the two is the most honourable character, I shall leave modern sophists to determine: my opinion has long been decisive on the subject.
After a week's seclusion Miss Woodford escaped from her den of persecution, and, not knowing whither to seek an asylum, passed the night of her emancipation in wandering about the fields near Hampstead. Soon after day break she was discovered by Mr. Optic, who had heard of her confinement, and was hastening to apprise her of her situation. Fainting with fatigue and nearly exhausted for want of nourishment, she
[Page 321]
sunk into his arms as he approached her; and the only power which was left her to express her sorrows, or her sense of his kindness, was that of tears; they flowed abundantly—they drew from his feeling heart a sympathetic tribute, which stoics may smile at, but which sensibility would be proud to boast as its purest, sweetest attribute! His was not the superficial ostentation of humanity—His ideas of friendship are best known by his own classical and harmonious delineation—
—“By friendship's skill divine,
All scenes delight—all seasons shine;
That, when the storms of winter roll,
With constant spring can charm the soul.
And bid the rose of pleasure blow,
'Mid poverty's surrounding snow.”
As soon as Miss Woodford was awakened from the dream of astonishment which Mr. Optic's presence had occasioned,
[Page 322]
she intreated that he would conduct her to her mother. He obeyed, and attended her to that home which maternal fondness never closed against her. But her chagrin was infinite when a strange servant informed her, that Mrs. Woodford, her health being greatly impaired by sorrow for the absence and mental derangement of her daughter, had, by the persuasions of Doctor Pimpernel, consented the same morning to set out with Lady Kencarth for Bristol. She also received farther intelligence, that Colonel Aubrey was at that port, waiting to sail for Gibraltar; and that Mr. Ainsforth had departed for Glenowen, to form a matrimonial alliance with Miss Hanbury.— The last erroneous report, I afterwards found, had been conveyed to Miss Woodford by the desire of Sir Sidney Aubrey. Mr. Optic attended the fair fugitive to the house of Lady Kencarth,
[Page 323]
where she found her thoughtless but generous cousin the Viscount, that instant setting out for Bristol. He offered her his protection; and she knew his heart. They therefore departed together, after pouring forth a thousand grateful acknowledgments for Mr. Optic's kind and benevolent interference.
The brief narrative being ended, I could not forbear to express my indignation at the malignant folly of Sir Sidney Aubrey. It seemed as if he knew no gratification in life equal to that of persecuting me. He had already wrested every hope from my bosom, by depriving me of Isabella, and, with a mischievous delight, which was the very wantonness of cruelty, he endeavoured to prevent my making an honourable recompence for the wrongs I had heaped upon Miss Woodford. His only delight, thought I, is the pleasure of irritating my weary mind, in hopes that I
[Page 324]
shall fly from persecution to the quiet of a grave! Then, shall I yield; and by expiring prove myself a coward? Shall I leave a wretch to revel in those joys, of which he has made me bankrupt? Shall the little tyranny of infancy ripen into mature oppression, and my despot live to triumph? These tacit questions, originating in the just indignation of offended pride, rebounded on my heart, and bruised its aching fibres. I writhed beneath the agony of thought, till resentment fixing in my breast, anticipated revenge—final, exemplary, terrible revenge.
The next sensation that possessed my mind was compunction for my conduct towards Miss Woodford; for it has ever been a decided opinion in my mind, that the man who first seduces a woman from the paths of chastity is accessary to all the ills that may await her during the remaining hours of her existence. To him
[Page 325]
the aching mind applies for solace, the trembling bosom for protection, the closing eye for that mild and contrite tear, which should embalm the dust, polluted by his passions. Are these the offices of modern gallantry? are such the graced attentions evinced by the existing race of man? For what does the lover in these enlightened times seduce his unsuspecting victim? —For the vanity of conquest! Whom does he consider in the triumph of sensuality?—Himself! What breast will contemn the libertine in the circles of congenial depravity?—None! Then where is woman to seek for that oblivion of thought which can alone render her existence tolerable?—Either in a daring round of dissipation, or in the grave!
I was roused from my reverie by the appearance of Miss Woodford. Merciful God! how did my heart throb when I beheld her—emaciated, trembling, and feeble as she stood before me!
[Page 326]
I flew towards her, she sunk upon a chair, and, bursting into tears, overwhelmed me with affliction. Lord Kencarth, during my reverie, had quitted the room, and I had once more an opportunity of pouring forth the anguish of my heart at the feet of my unfortunate victim. I conjured her to tranquillize her mind, —to unfold the determinations of her bosom; and, if she was still averse to an union with Colonel Aubrey, to bestow on me that hand which would do honour to my family.
She looked earnestly at me during several minutes. The tenderness of expiring passion tempered the stern gaze of indignation, and with a firm impressive tone, she answered—“Never, Walsingham! Oh! never ! The delirium of affection is over; and the pride of insulted love now claims dominion in my bosom. Since I could not fascinate your mind by the purity of virtue,
[Page 327]
I am neither so vain nor so believing as to hope, that, robbed of the jewel reputation, you will respect my feelings, or sooth them into self-acquittal; the pride of my heart has outlived the purity of my fame. If I was beneath your protection and esteem, I am still above your pity.”
“Honour me, at least, with your friendship,” said I.
“I will not promise you even that,” replied Miss Woodford. “Friendship may rapidly ripen into love; but love requires a length of time before it can soften into friendship. A thousand gradations must mark a diminution of the interesting emotions of the heart, which are wholly different from those of a mental nature. The cold respect of friendship is an insult to the memory of love; for the despot who ‘rules a tyrant, if he rules at all,’ having once been in possession of unbounded sway,
[Page 328]
will not condescend to become a pensioner on the mental charity of his vassal, till the reign of dominion is recommenced by a new source of triumphs, and another object occupies the mournful vacuum, which is still aching in the bosom. Men may talk of sober friendship growing out of deeply-rooted love: it is a fine romantic species of sophistry, invented by caprice to sooth the victims of a deluded faith; a pleasing, placid mask, calculated to conceal the sickening features of disgust, and to cheat the senses with a shadow of that passion, which time, and the fickleness of folly, have completely vanquished.”
“You think too severely of our sex,” said I, “when you suppose that respect, esteem, and friendship, cease with love.”
“Ah, Walsingham!” replied Miss Woodford, shaking her head with a
[Page 329]
melancholy expression, “you know not the meaning of the word. There is only one sort of love, but there are a thousand different copies of it 12
“What was the attachment of Heloise to St. Preux?” said I.
“Love,” replied Amelia. “The great delineator of Nature, who formed those imaginary beings, knew that it was love. The rectitude of a finely organized mind may teach it to fulfil the duties of domestic life with decency and honour: gratitude may insure attention, and moral virtue be the basis of fidelity: but all this may be done at the same moment that the senses are possessed, and the bosom animated by tenderer, warmer affections for another object. I could be the lover of my friend; but the vanity of the human heart will not,
[Page 330]
till after every trace of passion is exterminated, permit us to be the friend of him whom it has once acknowledged as a lover. I do not pretend to assert, that the ardent fondness of the passion, the tender hopes, the zealous assiduities, which characterise a lover in the early enthusiasm of pursuit, can last beyond possession of their object: these do not constitute love; they are the mere appendages, worn on the holiday of expectation, and cast off when reason points out a milder, purer source of pleasure. The mind then embraces a more solid gratification; the object of its affection—for I will not admit of its cold shadow friendship—then becomes a part of our existence. We find it as closely united with vitality, as the air we breathe; it is a sort of second self, which must either be acknowledged as such, or, being torn by violence from its natural home, become an alien for ever.”
[Page 331]
“Is there not a pure sensation which may be felt when the ardent passions become harmonized by time and nature?” said I.
“Unquestionably,” answered Miss Woodford; “but still it is love, not friendship. That being does not deserve the proud distinction, the transcendent merit of truly loving, who could not pass a life of calm enjoyment wholly uncontaminated by every sensual motive; who could not retain the rich and sacred impulse of the soul, not only amidst the busy, dark vicissitudes of fortune, but even in a state of lasting separation.”
I sighed at the idea—she continued— after a glance of reproof, which I felt more than I should have done the severest reproaches—
“How sceptical was that emotion of your heart!” said she. “But it is the custom of your sex to doubt the enthusiasm
[Page 332]
of our's in points of affection, till we are taught to suspect it ourselves; and that sincerity, which requires a watch over its thoughts and actions, will soon feel an inclination to revolt. We may indulge the glowing illusions of fancy till we teach ourselves to think them real, particularly if the chimeras which they present are pleasing to the mind, or gratifying to the senses. By such soothing deceptions, the shadows of caprice grow into substantial joys, till time invigorates the spring of affection, and the fascination becomes not only strong, but lasting. These are the causes and effects of pure and genuine attachment, springing from, and existing only in minds of a peculiar and exalted cast: the selfish sensualist was not born to know them.”
“Yet I cannot help thinking, that more real felicity owes its birth to friendship than to love,” said I.
[Page 333]
“That point I will not dispute with you,” replied Miss Woodford; “but the heart must have some strong and interesting sensation of attachment, or it will become an aching vacuum, believe me. Call it friendship, call it love: but whichever name you give it, remember that it must stand alone; it must not be dependent on another species of enchantment, or originate in any remote impression on the passions.”
“I am rather inclined to think that apathy is more desirable than either,” said I; “and that to escape the pangs of sensibility, I would readily relinquish its enjoyments.”
“How false is such reasoning!” interrupted Miss Woodford. “I recollect the words of an elegant writer, who says, ‘Is there a man upon the face of the earth who would deliberately accept of all the wealth, and all the affluence this world can bestow, if offered to him
[Page 334]
upon the severe terms of his being unconnected with a single mortal whom he could love, or by whom he should be beloved 13 ?”
We were interrupted by the arrival of a courier, who came to announce the approach of Mrs. Woodford and Colonel Aubrey. Amelia's cheek turned pale, and the blood suddenly forsook her lip, as she sunk into my arms, overwhelmed with contending emotions. I knew not what to do: I could not think of leaving her in such a situation, and I knew, at the same time, that to be discovered with Miss Woodford, whom I had renounced, apparently, would convey suspicions injurious to my sincerity, and fatal to her last hope of happiness.
After several minutes had elapsed,—minutes, no less perilous to her than painful to myself,—I observed the first
[Page 335]
tinge of returning circulation, casting a feeble flush over her cheek, and on her lip, which quivered as she addressed me.
“Oh, Walsingham!” said she, with a feeble tone of intreaty, “I conjure you to depart,—to leave me, for ever. Your presence will be but a poor return for Colonel Aubrey's generous conduct, —though a certain source of agony to my afflicted parent. You have once involved me in the deepest abyss of misery; do not again expose me to contempt and sorrow. You cannot, oh, Walsingham! you will not, a second time, be the destroyer of Colonel Aubrey's hopes;— for, with all my frailties, all my imperfections, he still loves me.”
The recollection of what I had long felt for Isabella, convinced me that the human heart will sometimes linger round the very shadow of departed hopes:—that “though we are driven from the
[Page 336]
sanctuary, our thoughts still cleave to the threshold.”
“Can you be happy with Colonel Aubrey?” said I.
Miss Woodford sighed, and her eyes uttered a thousand answers, which her tongue had not power to express. At last, with a faultering articulation, she replied, “I can be tranquil; I can be resigned; I shall obey a dear and adored parent; I shall prove my gratitude to a worthy—honourable man; and I shall quit this scene of painful humiliation— for ever.”
Lord Kencarth now rushed into the room:—“Walsingham,” cried he, “by all that is fair and honourable, you must instantly be off; or my pretty coz will, by prozing with you, lose a husband who will patch up the flaws you have made in her reputation.—Come, my hearty, kiss little Milly, and bid her
[Page 337]
farewel.—What has passed must be forgotten, and she'll make a better wife than half her acquaintances after all.” Then turning towards Miss Woodford he exclaimed, “Dash my wig! why, Milly, what a doleful phiz you make! You look as though you hadn't a smile left to pay the parson. Quiz me, coz, why I shou'dn't wonder if you sung the black psalm, when you should be queering us with love, honour, and obey.—Cheer up, my neat one! brighten your sparklers, and tip old wigsby a twitch of the heart, in return for his gold padlock. Why, if you pipe your eye, and sport your glum mazzard at the church door,—dish me! but the joiner will fly off in a tangent, and you'll get no spousy after all, little Milly.”
“Walsingham! I conjure you, once more, to begone,” said Miss Woodford, turning aside to conceal a tear, which all her cousin's uncouth raillery could not repel.
[Page 338]
I advanced towards the door, and at the moment when I was bound by honour, delicacy, and gratitude, to relinquish her for ever, I first began to feel a wish, which owed its origin to my perverse nature, ever prone to resist where constraint was necessary; and had there been no such being upon earth as Colonel Aubrey, I should at that moment have proudly claimed the name of husband from the unhappy and neglected Amelia.
Mrs. Woodford's arrival with Colonel Aubrey compelled me to quit the room. I had not resolution to utter a single adieu, but hastened to my chamber; where, after passing a few minutes in busy mingling rumination, I ordered a chaise, with post-horses, to be got ready immediately.
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
[Page ]
VOL. IV.
[Page ]
CHAP. LXXI. Just as I was stepping into the chaise, Lord Kencarth followed me, and insisted on being my companion to London. I would have been thankful for his society at any other period; but in the state of mind which I then felt myself inclined to indulge, the solitude of a desart would have promised the most pleasing retreat for rumination. I could at that moment have relinquished the world for ever: I could have beheld the barren summits,
[Page 2]
and the tawny woods of Glenowen, with a sober, sweet delight, which is not to be found in the chaos of populated cities.
Lord Kencarth entered the chaise, after ordering his servant to follow with his own carriage,—and to meet us at Devizes. I was little disposed to talk, and I knew that the young lord was still less inclined to taciturnity. In order to avoid trivial conversation, I pleaded the indisposition which I really felt, and which was the effect of my last twelve hours agitation. But with that boisterous flow of animation, which is generally the attendant of strong health of body and feeble organization of mind, he began what he called shaking off my lethargy, and raising my spirits at the expence of my understanding.
“Never think, my hearty,” cried his lordship;— “leave pedants and cynics to think;—let us be jolly: you
[Page 3]
don't know how I make the people stare as I pass through towns and villages.—Why, I am as well known on the Bath road as the milestones.—You shall see how I'll quiz the knowing ones. D---me, the girls fly helter-skelter when they see my carriage, as though they were all broke loose from their nurseries.”
“I suppose your lordship finds more entertainment in following, than they in flying,” interrupted I, merely for the sake of saying something, my thoughts still wandering to distant objects.
“You never were more mistaken in your life,” replied the young lord; “for however I may give my tongue a licence, dash my wig if I hav'n't a heart as white as a snowball. My pleasures are all as harmless as the gambols of a kitten. I hate twaddling with other people's happiness, while I find that I have plenty to do in taking care of my own. Besides, the world is wide enough for us
[Page 4]
all; and he that can't find fun without making hearts ache, why, dash me, but he is an ass, and deserves to bear the burden of a bad conscience.”
“I am exactly of your lordship's opinion,” said I. “But before I judge how far your theory and your practice correspond, I should like to know what you call harmless pleasure.”
“Why, pleasure that is not productive of harm,” replied the young lord.
“Unquestionably,” said I; “but most probably we differ as to the acceptation of the term.”
“Whose judgment and experience are most likely to obtain credit?” cried Lord Kencarth; “tell me that, my hearty, and then we'll open our budget of knowledge. 'Tis easy to preach, my good fellow, but one is sometimes apt to forget the text, and become a twaddler.”
[Page 5]
“I do not pretend to inculcate any great portion of moral doctrine,” said I, “for there lives not a being, whose conduct through life has been more frequently marked with error.”
“So much the better!” exclaimed his lordship. “Quiz my jasey, if I don't revere your spirit, and honour your discernment. Why there's nothing like a little enterprise.—Dash through thick and thin, hustle old Prudence, kick up a row whenever she attempts to oppose you, and d--- me you are the thing, my hearty.”
“Are you not apprehensive that the opinions of mankind, in general, will condemn such conduct?” said I.
“Who cares?” vociferated the young lord: “not I, by all that's quizzical! Look at the conduct of older men than I:—they don't mind the world:—we all act alike; then who has any business to
[Page 6]
find fault?—tell me that, my hearty. Dish my sconce! the higher the rank, the greater right to be amused. I have tried all sorts of sports:—I'm up to any thing:— the whole world knows Kencarth for a pupil of the true school. No man can upset a watch-box, shy at a shop window, quiz a citizen, dish a deep one, queer an old woman, or cajole a young one, better than I can. Do you know how I have passed my time since I came to years of discretion?”
“No, truly,” answered I.
“Then, dash my wig, but I'll tell you. Why, in hunting, racing, rowing, quizzing, queering, badgering, boxing, mumming, drinking, driving, and making love. But this is not all;—I am a deep one at the fine arts;—I can draw caricatures, play at cricket, navigate my own cutter, fight a bull-dog, and write rum chimes for our catch-club.”
[Page 7]
“You must find such a variety of occupations fatiguing both to your mind and body,” said I.
“Not a bit,” replied his lordship, with a shrug of indifference. “I considered them as parts of my education; but they didn't do; I soon grew tired of them, and cut the connection; for I almost broke my neck fox-hunting; was taken in, racing, by my groom's playing booty; upset my wherry, rowing, and was near drowning little Milly; was nigh dishing my adversary, boxing; got into a duel for quizzing; was hissed off my own stage, mumming; caught a fever with drinking; and was popped into Doctors' Commons for making love.”
“Astonishing!” said I, “that harmless amusements should be productive of such perilous consequences.”
“Give your tongue a holiday,” cried the young lord, “and I'll tell you more of the same sort. Queer me, a gentleman
[Page 8]
can't follow his own fancy now-a-days, but people of low occupations will presume to find fault and condemn one. Would you believe it, my hearty? dash my jasey, if I wasn't threatened with the pillory for drawing caricatures; though the subjects of my pencil were as well known as old copper-face at Charing-Cross. Then, to complete my disappointments, I run my cutter ashore on the Goodwins; broke a friend's leg with a cricket-ball; got my arm dangerously wounded by sparring with my bull-dog, and was voted a bore nem. con . at the catch-club! So, dash my wig, but I bought a tandem; put two blood horses before it; mounted a box-coat with twelve collars; sported an old girl of fashion, on the wrong side of forty, and kicked up a breeze at all the watering-places, to make the citizens stare, and to prove my nobility.”
[Page 9]
“Wonderful!” exclaimed I. “The world must greatly edify by such dashing exploits, and your name cannot fail to stand high on the list of modern prowess. But with all your lordship's industry, I do not find that mental improvement has been in the smallest degree an object of consideration.”
“There you are out again,” replied his lordship; “I am known to be a fellow of infinite taste, and have done more towards the improvement of things, than all your deep ones in both universities. Dash me, but my name ought to be immortalized; —why, I have completely ousted all pretenders to the neat thing, since I invented the slap-bang coaches, and sported the tandem. Why, I first proposed premiums for the fiercest breed of bulldogs, —made subscriptions for boxing, —and produced a fellow who could eat a live cat in the space of twenty minutes: and as for fashion, dash my jasey, if I
[Page 10]
didn't introduce crops, high-crowned hats, and twelve-inch bludgeons to all the fashionables from Whitechapel to St. James's. Why, do you know that I have two polygraphs?”
“I do not comprehend the term,” said I.
“Dish my sconce! where have you lived?” exclaimed his lordship. “Why, you ought to know that a polygraph is a fellow that apes one's dress and manners as close as one's shadow: one that is up to all our gossip; is sick, lame, blind, gay, grave, in and out of condition, in imitation of his prototype. Why a true polygraph would break an arm, fracture a leg, knock out an eye, or starve himself into a decline, rather than lose a single trait of his noble original. It was only last year that I wore deep mourning four times, on purpose to dish my shadows in sables. Dash my jasey, but the experiment succeeded;—my phantoms
[Page 11]
were taken in:—one of them was nabbed by his tailor, for the bill which he contracted;—the knowing one smoked the sham, and my shadow was nicked and locked up, for being my representative one hour every day in Pall Mall and Bond-street.”
“Alas, poor shadow!” exclaimed I; “and were you not sorry when you heard of his misfortune?”
“No;—queer my phiz, what signified making wry faces?” said his lordship; “I settled the business in a shorter way:—I sent him the money, and promised to wear a drab frock for the next twelve months. Not long after this event, I met with my match in Old Vixen. The creature was as gentle as my grandmother's tabby,—but I gave her a twist of the mazzard that set her upon her pins; she fastened on my arm, and, dash my wig, but she did me. I kept my room three weeks nursing the
[Page 12]
wound, while my polygraph regularly appeared in Fops-alley and Bond-street during the whole time, with his arm in a sling, and with a phiz as sharp as a hatchet. I sent him word when I got well, and, queer my caxon, but his recovery was astonishing!”
“The caprices of the human mind are indeed unaccountable,” said I. “Our ancestors delighted in displaying a proud originality, but the present generation, I find, aims at the very reverse, by imitating even the deformities of nature.”
“Come, none of your musty morality,” cried his lordship; “I know you, my hearty;—I am not to be taken in by a lankey face and a sermon. I know how to live, though I don't preach virtue and forbearance. I never debauched an honest girl; robbed a flat at a farotable, or run a friend through the body, to enhance my reputation. My sports are all in style;—I please myself, and hurt
[Page 13]
nobody;—I have my tandem, my cutter, my polygraph, my bull-dog, and my old woman; and, dash my jasey, but I am as happy as any prince in the universe.”
“Very possibly,” said I, while reflection darted across my brain, leaving an impression of the most sombre nature. After a pause of some moments, during which imagination wandered over past and present prospects, while a sigh involuntarily struggled within my breast, I again addressed his lordship: “What hours in your busy routine of amusements do you devote to rest?” said I.
“Why I always dose at the gabshop,” replied he; “I got a seat because it was the right thing. But, as my colleague employs half his time in writing speeches, and the other half in learning to repeat them, I am content to be taken in as a sleeping partner. My elocution consists of monosyllables; — ayes and noes settle the affairs of the
[Page 14]
nation, under the present system of things, as well as all the slack-jaw of modern orators:—why, they all know that 'tis labour in vain, and I am too wise to have my ears bored and my tongue tired for nothing.”
“But are your constituents satisfied with the services you render them?” said I.
“I don't trouble my head about that,” replied his lordship. “I bought my seat; and if Englishmen will submit their rights to the degradation of being sold, they cannot wonder at any use we think proper to make of them.”
By the time that his lordship had concluded his remark, to the truth of which my mind gave tacit acquiescence, the post-boy stopped at Devizes. We were ushered from our chaise with considerable ceremony by the landlord of the inn; and I, who, when alone and oppressed with wrongs, was treated like
[Page 15]
the veriest vagabond, was now, as the companion of Lord Kencarth, distinguished by the most profound respect. Bows that almost met the ground, and titles that are promiscuously bestowed on every appendage to nobility, followed us to the drawing-room. The landlord's zeal was laborious,—his countenance animated,—his language obsequious, and his memory conveniently short, whenever he glanced at my features; while I, with my pencil, wrote on the window-shutter the following
STANZAS:
Since Fortune's smiles alone can give
   Respect to fools, to knaves renown;
Let Reason bid me calmly live,
   And Fortune mark me with her frown.
For who would buy the wretched state
   Which conscious vice or dulness knows?
Or who be vainly, meanly great
   With pow'r that from oppression grows?
[Page 16]
While Nature, with a partial hand,
   Her darling children beckons forth;
While fools and knaves usurp command,
   And Fortune flies from modest worth.
Then give, O Fortune ! all thy store
   To insects, of a sunny day:—
While I the paths of Truth explore,
   Andsmile the darkest hours away.
Oh, Rosanna! how vain, how empty are those mortals, who, as the summer gale sustains the gossamer, are upborne on the breath of popularity by their own lightness; while those who possess the more solid virtues are condemned to bear their unprofitable load, through the gloomy paths of sorrow and obscurity!
[Page 17]
CHAP. LXXII. While Lord Kencarth visited the stable to purchase a hunter which had been sold by Lady Emily Delvin, in part payment of Lord Linbourne's debt, I strolled towards the Black Lion to inquire after honest Ned, and to satisfy my mind respecting the fate of the young highwayman. On my arrival I found the house uninhabited; and was informed by a villager, whose cottage was not far distant, that the landlord, being suspected of having some concern in stopping the carriage of Lady Emily Delvin, had prudently absconded, to avoid the danger of a criminal prosecution. I was apprehensive that any minute inquiries on my part might increase suspicion; and therefore, without farther investigation
[Page 18]
of the business, I returned to Devizes.
I found the young Lord delighted with his bargain, surrounded by grooms and ostlers, drinking and swearing with most condescending courtesy. All his polished vocabulary was displayed with familiar ease; while his jolly companions drank to his ‘health and prosperity,’ as he paid one hundred guineas for a beast not worth fifty; and which, being both vicious and unruly, had already endangered the lives of the most expert horsemen. I perceived that it would be in vain to offer any thing like dissuasion from the purchase; his lordship knew the ostler to be “a fellow of infinite worth—one of the right sort—up to a bargain, but honest as the light”—and I was too prudent to calumniate a great man's favourite, where I knew that admonition would be considered as impertinent interference, and while I reflected, that to attempt restraining
[Page 19]
some minds, is only to propel them on to new acts of folly and indiscretion.
As soon as dinner was over, four horses were ordered to Lord Kencarth's chaise, and I endeavoured to excuse myself from accompanying his lordship any farther. My mind was little disposed to amusement, and my heart panted for the quiet of seclusion. It was in vain that I intreated his lordship to proceed without me.
“Dash me if you shall go,” said he; “I want to hire a tutor, to travel with me, and you are the thing to a tittle, my hearty; therefore make no excuses— for stay you must—and so settle your phiz, and be quiet. Quiz me, if I don't give you five hundred a year to teach me philosophy—I know every thing else that is worth learning; and when I have got a little of that, why, queer me if I am not up to any thing.”
[Page 20]
Necessity being a powerful stimulator, and Adversity at that moment fixing her haggard eyes upon me, I thought it most prudent to accept his lordship's proposal, and to pursue the paths of mental humiliation in the new character of, what is politely termed, a modern bear-leader.
The young Lord was enraptured with the idea of flying over the continent, and of displaying his wealth at the expence of his reputation; while I anticipated the many disgraces from which reason would shrink, were it not sustained by the all-powerful force of long-established custom.
The chaise was ordered to the door, and we were descending to depart, when Lord Kencarth, stopping short, exclaimed— “Dash my jasey, Ainsforth, but you shall ride my new horse. I want to try him, and to find out whether he has any vices.”
[Page 21]
“I thank your lordship,” answered I, “but having no inclination to break my neck, I must beg leave to decline making the experiment.”
“Poh, poh!” cried his lordship; “come, let us see what sort of an equestrian you are. Do you know that I can ride three horses?”
“Therefore the better able to manage one,” interrupted I.
“Bravo! my hearty! you are a deep one!” said the young Lord. “But I am not so easily gulled. The horse is a good horse—the neat thing—no daisy-cutter— a nice bit of blood—fit for a prince; and quiz me, but you must mount him. I want to see his paces—to observe how he carries his head—whether he has a good forehand—and what sort of a figure he makes over a five-barred gate.”
I returned no answer, but smiled.
“What! tutor!” cried his lordship, “Are you dumb-founded?—don't be
[Page 22]
frightened—Why you may guide him with a thread along a six-inch deal board for a thousand.”
“Since the task is so easy, your lordship will act wisely to undertake it,” said I. “Yet let me caution you to be careful; for if I am rightly informed, the animal is vicious.”
“I like him the better,” replied his lordship: “a beast without some shew of spirit is not worth his keep. Dash me, if I would maintain a cat that was not a match for her peer. You shall see some fun before you and I have lived together a fortnight. I know how to employ time and to acquire knowledge.”
“Unquestionably,” said I; “for experience is the foundation of wisdom; and in the experimental way your lordship's industry is unequalled. Yet, let me advise you not to follow the impulse of an enterprising spirit, beyond the bounds of reason and reflection.”
[Page 23]
“Is that your way, my hearty?” inquired his lordship archly. “Do you always reflect before you decide? Do you look before you leap? Queer my caxon, if you are not a rum one! but you can't do me over; I am not so easily bamboozled—I'm above your match, my dainty; you can't humbug me.”
“That I am the most erring of Nature's children, I readily acknowledge,” said I; “but we are all eager to preach what we are slow to practise.”
“Why that's honest, dash my jasey!” cried his lordship; “and, in order to please both parties in the present case, you shall continue to preach, and I to practise. You say my horse is a bad horse—I say he is a good one; you say he is vicious—I maintain that he is as kind-natured as a lamb; you think him dear—I know that I have him a bargain; you are afraid to ride him—and therefore
[Page 24]
I am determined to shew you some sport. So here goes—neck or nothing —little venture little have, all the world over—queer my caxon, d---me!”
At the conclusion of this eloquent and fashionable oration, his lordship mounted the hunter; and, setting off full speed, was out of sight before I had time to enter the carriage. I ordered the post-boy to follow him, and we departed from the inn door with all possible expedition, amidst the shrugs and sneers of grooms, jockeys, ostlers, waiters, and travellers, who unanimously anticipated the fate of the equestrian hero, in his new trial of adventurous prowess.
We had not proceeded three miles on the road towards London when, in passing through a village, I observed several persons assembled round a cottage door, and peeping through the casements of the lower windows into a room which
[Page 25]
faced the high-road. Curiosity led me to inquire the cause of their earnest attention, when a little boy informed me, that a groom had been thrown from his horse, and was taken to the cottage to have his wounds drest. I instantly sprung from the chaise, and forced my way through the inquisitive throng: on entering the house, I discovered Lord Kencarth bleeding and almost senseless.
The wound which he had received in his fall was near the right temple, and the effusion of blood for a time suspended all sensation: with proper care and applications, however, in the space of an hour, he was able to speak; and with my assistance, after he had liberally repaid the cottager's hospitality, to enter his carriage. The horse, after he had dismounted his venturous rider, proceeded on full speed towards Marlborough, where, on our arrival at the
[Page 26]
Castle, we found him in the hands of the ostler.
My noble pupil, though faint with his loss of blood, could not be prevailed on to remain quiet during the stage from the scene of disaster to the inn, where I proposed resting that night: a surgeon was sent for, and the wound examined. The result of his opinion was favourable to our hopes, and his Lordship was informed that on the following day he might travel with safety.
During the whole evening my pupil talked of nothing but of returning to Devizes, to “give the ostler his gruel” for having taken him in. It was in vain that I endeavoured to reconcile his mind to the event; in vain, that I reminded him of my original opinion of the animal; the young lord was duped, and self-love was mortified, though self preservation was not deemed an object of the least
[Page 27]
importance. Exploits of an eccentric nature constituted the labour and amusement of his lordship's life, and where ever he failed in his enterprises, his vanity being wounded, neither reason nor conviction of his own errors in judgment could reconcile him to the misfortune: for it is a maxim of Rochefoucauld, that “self-love is the greatest of flatterers;” and we are apt to admire the offspring of our own imagination, however it may be fashioned by bad taste, or distorted by the false decorations of an inexperienced parent.
Early on the following morning Lord Kencarth, after selling his hunter to the master of the inn for twenty pounds, set out towards London. His head was somewhat cooled by the decrease of circulation, and his pocket lighter by the purchase of the preceding day: but as his mind was irritated, and his pride humbled by an event, which either
[Page 28]
proved want of dexterity or deficiency of judgment; in either case it was dangerous to renew the topic; and my pupil being little inclined to think of any other, we pursued our journey in sullen silence, till we reached Newbury.
CHAP. LXXIII. We stopped at Newbury only while we changed horses, and immediately proceeded on our route towards London. Lord Kencarth being anxious to attend a boxing-match which was to take place near Hounslow on the following morning, the post-boys were ordered to “make the best of their way,” and I may with truth affirm, that they did not fail to obey the injunction. We flew with almost incredible velocity over
[Page 29]
plains, through villages, and along lanes, to the no small terror of those whom we met, and to the extreme peril of our own existence—Lord Kencarth encouraging the postillions with promises of liberal payment, and I every instant expecting little less than annihilation.
When we stopped within thirty miles of the metropolis, my noble pupil proposed mounting the leading horse himself. It was to no purpose I reminded him of his recent accident, or anticipated the probability of his bringing on a fever by so rash an undertaking—the horses were stopped, and the young lord, after desiring the post-boy to take care of his tutor, ordered him into the chaise, while he mounted the weary animal, and, with true equestrian grace, again set forward on his journey.
We had not proceeded more than two miles when we were overtaken by a stage coach. The driver endeavoured
[Page 30]
to pass us, but Lord Kencarth was too ambitious to suffer such a humiliation. The son of the whip, with a contemptuous smile, commenced the career of glory. Never did the car of a victor, in ancient days of valour, dash through the fields of carnage with more triumphant dignity. Side by side, wheel almost touching wheel, did we continue to urge the flying steeds, and to roll in clouds of dust near three miles, when one of those slow nuisances, a broad-wheeled waggon in a narrow lane, presented its ponderous form, and menaced desolation. The stage-coachman continued the contest with unabated velocity. My pupil was too determined to give in, and, by endeavouring to hustle his antagonist, overset the chaise into a deep ditch, while the conqueror pursued his way with most insulting triumph.
I could scarcely help laughing, though every bone in my body was shook by
[Page 31]
the concussion. The noble postillion was unhurt, and no damage was done, except breaking the lamps and windows of the carriage. Being near an inn, a chaise was speedily procured, and with fresh horses we continued our course; I, heartily tired of “travelling in stile,” and Lord Kencarth vowing vengeance against the victorious coachman.
We did not overtake the hero of the day till we came to Hounslow-heath. It was near the close of twilight, and the dusky light barely presented the object of my pupil's indignation to his inquisitive gaze. The stage coach proceeded, and we followed, till we stopped at the inn door, when Lord Kencarth, leaping from the chaise and springing forward, seized the coachman by the leg, and obliged him to descend from that eminence, which, in the eyes of my pupil, was more desirable than the laurelled car in which the son of
[Page 32]
Jupiter Ammon overlooked the towering walls of Babylon.
The coachman, elated with success in his first trial of dexterity, flattered himself with the hope that victory would crown the termination of his exploit. But Lord Kencarth was an expert pugilist; he had taken lessons during several months from the most able professors of the science, and was considered as a finished master of that art, which, though strongly characteristic of national intrepidity, has sometimes displayed a degree of ferocity, disgraceful to a civilized people.
A combat fierce and terrible instantaneously commenced. I intreated my pupil to remember his wounded head, and informed the coachman that his antagonist was not in a condition for the rencontre. The inequality of the combatants, in point of personal strength, was evident to every by-stander; but
[Page 33]
though the hero of the whip was as athletic as Hercules, the young lord was more than his match in dexterity. There was also another requisite in which his opponent was miserably deficient; this quality, without which the powers of Atlas would be insufficient in a contest for victory, was courage. The coachman was faint-hearted; the noble, possessed the nerves of a young lion. The former, after a sharp onset of twelve minutes, gave in, and the tumultuous spectators bore the latter in triumph on their shoulders:—but mark the sequel. The vanquished sufferer was so severely beaten, that his life was despaired of: one arm was rendered for ever useless; and my pupil was induced, by that generosity which predominated over all his eccentricities, to settle an annuity of one hundred pounds on his maimed antagonist, as a voluntary recompence for the misfortune.
[Page 34]
On the following morning we repaired to a gravel pit, which was fixed on for the theatre of pugilistic exhibition. A vast concourse of persons had assembled at an early hour, and my pupil pointed out the most popular amateurs of the science, from the gartered noble to the driver of a dust cart. There all distinctions were levelled, and a condescending familiarity was uniformly displayed, from the rank of my Lord Duke, to the lowest link-boy that followed his nightly occupation in the avenues of the theatres.
The contest was soon decided by an unlucky blow, which, to use my pupil's expression, dished the sconce of the ill-fated victim. He fell; and while the eager throng shouted victorious clamours, the wretched being ended his career of glory, as he poured forth an agonized sigh which closed his busy scene for ever.
[Page 35]
The multitude was scattered in all directions, while I remained, with a few thinking mortals, rapt in a reverie, and gazing on the lifeless pugilist. Poor atom of mortal frailty! thought I, how ghastly, and how horrible thou look'st! thy swift career of false ambition is for ever closed, and thy last act of prowess will throw a shadow on thy name, which will tarnish thy hard-earned laurels, and stigmatize thy memory. These reflections led on to the wide theatre of human nature, where the soldier, statesman, poet, and philosopher, play their adventurous scene; and if, by any chance, they fail in one great enterprise, their last disgrace is alone remembered, while the labours of whole years are buried in oblivion.
[Page 36]
CHAP. LXXIV. Powerfully impressed by the awful and unexpected exit of the ill-fated pugilist, I quitted his corpse, and strolled pensively towards Hounslow. The multitude had departed from the scene of death with little sorrow, and still less reflection; a desperate mortal's life was deemed a trifling sacrifice in comparison with the sport which his exploits had afforded at former periods, and the only regret which his noble patrons felt on the present awful occasion, originated in the certainty that he could amuse them no longer.
On my arrival at the inn, I instantly inquired after my eccentric pupil; but he had adjourned to a neighbouring public-house with the victor, whose situation was only one degree better than
[Page 37]
that of his lifeless antagonist. While I sat ruminating at the window which opened to the high road, my fancy wandering back to the solitudes of my childhood, and my heart sickening with disgust at the prospect before me, a deep but impressive voice addressed me—
“Something, if you please, to a poor old seaman, your honour; a little matter, with the blessing of God, and I shall be thankful.”
I turned towards the venerable suppliant, and my heart beat with a quickened circulation the instant I fixed my eyes upon him. He retired a few paces, and taking off his hat, exposed to view a head thinly scattered with white hairs, and which, added to a peculiar cast of expression that marked his countenance, could not fail to excite veneration and pity. He rested on his crutch, still holding his hat with both his hands before his breast. A slight.
[Page 38]
shower was at that moment falling; the drops had spangled his silver hairs before I recollected his situation. I desired him to cover his head—he bowed, and obeyed my orders; not as if to gratify his own convenience, but with that graced complacency which seems to experience pleasure in harmonizing the feelings of others.
I looked earnestly in his face; the deep lines of age were strongly engraven, though they had a sort of zigzag expression, which seemed the effect of a fierce struggle with the world's unkindness. Now, thought I, if unsophisticated features present a faithful tablet of the mind, shew me a philanthropist or a philosopher, who can compare traits indicative of truth and honesty with this tempest-beaten old sailor.
His countenance was sun-burnt and withered; it presented the tawny hue of a rich autumn, rather than the freezing
[Page 39]
vacancy of a long and dreary winter: yet I could not help thinking it exhibited something of sorrow so touching, that I would not have stirred a step, or turned my eyes on any other object at that moment, to have been made the first potentate in the universe. So much for fascination, and now for sympathy— the gradations, in some instances, are as rapid as our thoughts.
He rested on his crutch, and looking mournfully on his mutilated limb, which had till that moment escaped my notice, heaved a sigh which would have pierced a bosom of marble. “Sixty years, your honour, and nothing left but a heavy heart, and this worn out bit of timber. Hard fate for a poor old son of the green waves, your honour.”
“With whom have you served?” said I.
“I served but little, your honour; yet I saw warm work, and many a
[Page 40]
brave soul buried in the rough ocean:— but an honourable grave is preferable to a long life of hardships.”
A sudden gust of wind blew back the white hairs which partly covered his cheek, and a big drop rolled rapidly from the corner of his eye. I watched it, and I don't know why, but I was sorry that it fell to the ground; I would have taught myself to believe that it was not a tear. No matter, thought I; if it is the effect of the cold and cutting wind, it is nearly the same thing. He again addressed me—
“I don't wish to be troublesome, your honour; but it is a sharp day, and my heart is chilled with the cold— a small matter would warm it, my noble master. But if it is your pleasure to deny me; why, God bless you!”
He was going: I glanced my eyes towards the interior of the room where I was sitting; a blazing fire seemed to
[Page 41]
invite the poor old traveller. “Come in,” said I, “and warm thyself, and tell me how thou camest, at this late hour of life, to carry such a passport in thy face, and so sorrowful a heart within thy bosom.”
He employed his crutch with new alacrity, and, on my opening a glass door, he entered the apartment.
“I am going to try for Greenwich, your honour,” said he sighing. “I never thought to become a burthen on the humanity of my country. But what can I do? I have no property left but my bit of timber, and my heart sinks sadly when I think of happier days.”
“You must forget them, my honest fellow,” said I, presenting him a few shillings. “Console yourself with the certainty, that if you are not a favourite with Fortune, your case is by no means singular.”
[Page 42]
“Fortune! your honour—God bless your kindness,” answered he. “I do not complain of Fortune; she is no friend to honesty: my affliction is more keen than that of poverty. My story is a sad one, your honour; you would not like to hear it. You don't seem to be one of the rough sort, who can turn with a dry eye from an old sailor's misfortunes.”
“Well, let me hear it,” said I; “perhaps there may be found a remedy---”
“My sorrow lies deep, your honour.”
Again he paused—
“Not beyond the reach of mortal aid?” said I.
“In the grave, your honour.”
Again he sighed deeply.
“There is no remedy but submission to the will of Heaven;” added he, with a shake of the head, and a melancholy expression of countenance, which increased
[Page 43]
the strong interest I already felt in his favour.
I have ever been strangely inclined to become a physiognomist; there are features which, somehow or other, seize upon my feelings with unaccountable powers of fascination: I have felt liking and disliking as the form of an eyebrow or the curve of a lip has influenced my fancy; and, nine times in ten, I have proved by experience, that the first impression did not deceive me.
“Come, tell thy story, my honest soul,” said I; “it will relieve thy full heart, and, perhaps, enable it to bear an accumulation of sorrow without breaking it.”
I reached him a chair by the fireside, and filled him a goblet of wine from a bottle that stood before me; he drank it eagerly. “Now,” said I, “thou wilt be able to get through the business stoutly.”
[Page 44]
He pressed his right hand on his breast, and passing the left across his eyes, which were nearly overflowing, began his story:—
“I am a native of Wales, your honour; I was born among mountains that reached the very sky. My parents were as honest as the light, and I was, at my setting out in life, as happy as the day was long.”
I felt a strong desire to bid him depart; something of sympathy began to excite emotions which it had long been the labour of my mind to overcome. After a moment's hesitation he proceeded—
“In my youth I was brought up to husbandry, and many a long summer-day have I laboured in the vallies of Glamorganshire. It was sweet labour, your honour; for it was followed by rest, and supported by a good conscience. I could wrestle with any
[Page 45]
youngster of my county, and no lad was better known for a strong arm and a fair character. 'Tis a poor withered fin now, your honour,” said he, stretching forth his arm, and looking at it with a melancholy smile; “but time and sorrow will pull down the strongest.
“At twenty, I fell in love, your honour. The girl was as fresh as a daisy, and had a heart as tender as— your honour's. Little Peggy Gwynn was the prettiest flower that ever grew among the mountains of Glamorgan. It would have done your heart good, your honour, had you seen her dance, and heard her sing; but she is in Heaven, and her poor Griffith is a beggar.”
Again he paused, and seemed to wander in imagination over the paths of his early life. “Ah! your honour,” said he, wiping his eyes, “had you known her, you would have thought as I did; she was as fair as a lily, and as innocent
[Page 46]
as a turtle-dove. But, as Fate would have it, the squire fell in love with her, and all kinds of temptations were offered to lead Peggy astray, your honour; but she was as virtuous as the light, and turned a deaf ear to all his professions, till her friends, to put her out of his way, sent her to London. It was on a winter morning that she set out; the snow fell and covered the mountains, and the torrents poured along the lanes like a deluge, your honour. I walked by the side of her horse; a kinsman rode before her—she said but little; yet she looked, your honour, as though her heart was breaking. At last we came to the turnpike where we had agreed to part, and her kinsman desired me to return home, and tell her friends that they were safe on the great road to London. If I have a soul to be saved, your honour, I thought I should never survive the separation. I went back,
[Page 47]
and I tried every way to bear my affliction like a Christian;—but all would not do:—not a mountain nor a valley met my eyes, but it reminded me of Peggy; and life at last became, as it were, a burden, your honour.”
Every vein in my heart throbbed in unison with old Griffith's as he advanced in his story.
“So, your honour, one morning in the following spring, just as the sun rose, I set out to follow Peggy. I had scraped together all my store of riches,—not much, your honour,—but it was the reward of honest industry; and resolving to travel on foot, proceeded towards London.
“I was not long on my journey:— love makes a man mighty swift footed, your honour. On my arrival, I inquired my way to the place of Peggy's residence, for she never failed to write every week; and her letters were tallies
[Page 48]
of her heart, your honour:—I used to keep watch for their arrival as though I was waiting for an enemy; and my heart was as light as a feather whenever I heard that she was well and prosperous. But, to return to my story, your honour.
“I found on my arrival in London that Peggy's relations lived in the far end of the city; and though I had walked thirty miles since sun-rise, I was nothing faint, your honour, for my courage was kept up by the hope of seeing Peggy. In my way, as fate would have it, what should I meet but a press gang. I was seized and carried on board a tender. I sent my little store to my poor forlorn girl, and in twelve hours after set sail to meet the enemies of my country.
“We had not been many days at sea, when we met the enemy;—'twas hot work, your honour! Many a stout-hearted
[Page 49]
seaman perished on that day;— but we dealt the foe such an example of English bravery, that the victory was ours before sunset. All the time I thought of Peggy, your honour, and just as I was calculating how happy we should be with my share of prize-money, whiz comes a cannon-ball, and lops off one of my timbers as clean as a whistle, your honour. I didn't much care about it, —only—I was afraid that Peggy might like me something the worse;—but I was a lubber for my pains, your honour, and deserved to be keelhauled for my suspicions.
“On our return home we met with a storm;—such a dreadful hurricane never blew from the heavens:—the sea rose mountains high, and every soul expected to go to the bottom. We hoisted the dead-lights, and fired signals of distress, but they were heard, your honour, no more than a pop-gun. At last
[Page 50]
the pumps began to choke, and we were obliged to throw our guns overboard; so some began to tire, and some to despair; and I began to pray for patience and resignation to the heart of poor Peggy.”
I filled him a second goblet of wine, and he proceeded:—
“At break of day, your honour, we found ourselves near the French coast, and separated from our companions. The ship was almost a wreck; and, to add to our misfortunes, an enemy's frigate bore down upon us. We were obliged to strike; so I was hauled ashore, with my shattered limb, and thrown into a prison at Bourdeaux. I wrote to Peggy, but I was a prisoner, and had no token of love to send her.— Indeed she wanted none, for her heart was not to be bought with gold—though it might break with sorrow. No matter! she is in Heaven, your honour!
[Page 51]
and little thinks that her poor Griffith, grown old and helpless, is wandering about the world—a beggar.”
“Thou art going to a tranquil asylum, my brave fellow,” said I.
“Ah, your honour!” cried he, with a movement of his head that implied his doubt of my assertion, “there is no resting-place for sorrow, but in the grave! Shall I go on with my story, or does it tire your honour?”
“Proceed,” said I.
He went on—
“After fourteen months imprisonment I was exchanged, and sent back to England. I was almost afraid to appear before Peggy without my timber; for what with one thing and what with another, I cut but a sorry figure, your honour. But my poor girl found no alteration in me, except the want of a leg, and a heart more fond of her than ever. I found her as true as the needle!—and
[Page 52]
though many a salt wave had washed over my head, she had not forgot me, but by her industry had increased my little store three-fold, your honour. We were soon after married.”
Here he stopped abruptly: his cheek displayed a convulsive motion, the effect of his efforts to suppress a tear, which, in spite of his endeavours, fell on the withered hand that rested on his crutch.
He went on—
“We set up a little shop near Wapping, and sold slops, your honour. My messmates loved me, and things went on prosperously. I was as happy, your honour, as the day was long. Peggy used to work at her needle from sun-rise to sun-set, and I considered the day that I lost my timber the luckiest of my life, your honour, for my poor girl always told me she loved me the better for it.”
Here he wiped his eyes with the corner of a silk handkerchief that he
[Page 53]
wore round his neck, and, by his evident emotion, I anticipated the termination of his story.
He continued—
“After four years of comfort, your honour, it pleased the Almighty to take my poor girl from me. She knew that she was going; and as I sat by her bedside, with a breaking heart, your honour, she looked in my face, and begged me to love and to take care of her babes. I could not speak, but I pressed her cold hand, and she smiled, your honour, just for all the world like a cherubim! So then I begged her to take comfort, and to live for my sake; but all would not do—she looked as if she wished to speak—she took my hand and kissed it, and two or three minutes after, with a sigh, she closed her poor dear eyes, and died like a lamb, your honour.
“I was now left alone with my motherless babes; the eldest was a girl
[Page 54]
three years old, your honour; she could talk, and I used to fancy that her voice was like her mother's; the youngest, a boy, was taken by Peggy's relations, for he was only five weeks old when it pleased God to take from me the comfort of my heart. After I had seen my poor girl laid in the grave, I had little mind to continue in business; but gave myself up to grief, your honour, and had no heart for any thing; so that in three months, by the time that I had paid the doctors for attending my wife, and my creditors were satisfied to the last farthing, I found myself going down in the world, for want of a helpmate; and one summer's day I set out with my little Judy for Pembrokeshire:—I was alone in the world, and all places were alike to me, your honour!—But to make short of my story;—I am afraid I intrude upon your honour.”
[Page 55]
“Thy story is an interesting one, my good fellow; go on,” said I.
“Your honour is very kind, and God bless you!” cried old Griffith.— “So I bought a little hut on the sea-shore, and employed myself in making nets for the fishermen that used to come with their smacks round from the Irish coast. They all knew poor Griffith, and they never failed to purchase my work as fast as I could finish it, your honour.
“My little Judy was my only companion; she grew stout and hearty, and by the time she was nine years old, she could cook my dinner and trim up our little cabin; and she used to pick up shell-fish; and—in short we were reconciled to our lot, which is every thing, your honour. But as fate would have it, just as Judy had passed her thirteenth year, one night, during the equinox, a gallant vessel was wrecked among the rocks within sight of my hovel. A small
[Page 56]
boat, with the few souls that escaped before she went down, was cast on the beach not a cable's length from my hut; I hastened to their assistance, and, breastdeep in the salt waves, brought a lady ashore upon my shoulders. She was as comely a woman as ever the sun shone upon!
“At first she was afraid of me, for shipwrecked souls sometimes meet with but sorry treatment on the coast, your honour; so she begged me not to use her ill:—but, the Lord bless your honour!” continued he, laying his hand upon his heart, “I would have suffered death rather than have done her any wrong. She stayed four days in our poor habitation, before she could stir out of my cot:—her companions by turns used to rest in little Judy's hammock. On her departure she offered gold, and many valuable treasures, saved from the wreck, but I would not be paid for doing
[Page 57]
my duty, your honour. Finding that I refused her favours, she proposed taking my little Judy and making her fortune, and said that she would give her learning like a lady. What could I do, your honour? It was a hard trial—Judy was willing to go with the lady, and I was not such a selfish lubber as to stand in the way of her advancement.”
“Poor fellow! it was cruel to take from thee thy only companion,” said I.
“Well, your honour, on a fine calm evening, away they went, and I was left in my hovel, on the sandy beach, without a friend in the world to comfort me. My mother had died while I was at sea; and my father, who soon followed her, never acknowledged me, because I deserted my home for Peggy. Often did I lie whole winter nights thinking on my little Judy, and wondering why she never wrote to tell me of her good fortune. Many years passed, and no news
[Page 58]
came; at last I concluded that she was dead; so I made a sort of tomb on the cliff, near my poor hut, and planted some trees about it, and carved upon it my dear wife's name and that of my poor Judy—and there, your honour, I used to sit and make my fishing-nets, and hear the salt waves dashing against the rocks or rolling on the sands, even to the very threshold of my little hovel.”
“And did you never know what became of your daughter?” said I.
“Never, your honour. I used not to see a soul except the fishermen, from year's end to year's end, and only knew how time passed away by the changing of the seasons. Sometimes in the depth of winter, the sea would roar like thunder, and the surges threaten to beat down my poor low hut. But Heaven was bountiful, and spared me.”
As he paused, reflection darted across my mind; and I could not help condemning
[Page 59]
those beings who, in the full enjoyment of every luxury, complain of Heaven's injustice, and hourly wish for death, while the poor old sailor, neglected by his kindred, forgotten by the world, persecuted by poverty, and tortured by the memory of his long-lost treasures, even amidst the rending sorrows of his heart, with a smile confessed that ‘Heaven was bountiful, and spared him!’
“And why didst thou quit the wavebeaten hovel?” said I.
“Why, your honour, the sea-breezes and the winter-storms shattered the poor habitation till it was dangerous to live in it. I had not strength to rebuild it—age and infirmity came fast upon me—and one winter morning, not long since, I took it into my head to set out for London. I climbed the cliff to take a last look at my poor Peggy's tomb. The ocean was as bright as silver, your honour;
[Page 60]
the sun shone as lively as though it had been spring; and the salt waves made the air as fresh as a May morning. I had hardly resolution to depart; but my little roof was nearly fallen in, and the foundation had, only twelve hours before, rocked as the wind howled round it. So, your honour, I carved the name of poor Griffith Blagden on the cliff, and with a heart as heavy as lead, your honour, set out upon my journey.”
I found by the conclusion of the old sailor's story, that he was the neglected father of the detestable Mrs. Judith Blagden. My heart, which sympathised in his artless narrative, was roused from the impression it made by indignation, and without waiting to question him farther, I ordered the waiter to take him into another room, and to give him whatever he chose to eat, while I went in search of my truant pupil.—I met him returning to the inn—I told him the story of the old
[Page 61]
sailor, and he united with me in earnest wishes to mend the veteran's fortune, and to investigate the story of his unnatural daughter.
As soon as the venerable forlorn had made a hearty dinner, Lord Kencarth proposed dispatching his servant with him in a post-chaise for London; with orders to provide him an apartment, and to supply him with every comfort that his age and necessities demanded.
“You shan't accept Greenwich, my buck, dash my jasey!” exclaimed his lordship. “Your old nob shall have a pillow of your own to rest on as long as I have a guinea in my pocket Quiz my caxon, but you shall live in clover, my old admiral, and forget that there is such a thing as poverty, till you close your peepers, and give us the go-by.”
“Your honour, I do not understand you,” said the veteran.
[Page 62]
“So much the better,” replied my pupil; “the greater will be your surprise, my hearty.—Dash my wig, if you shan't dance a hornpipe at my wedding, and square your elbows with the best of 'em. Dish my sconce, if you shan't have a silver leg, that shall dazzle the daylights of all the yellow admirals in the dead list of live-stock, my dainty.”
“But, your honour, I am old, and only want a day of rest before I end my journey to the grave,” said the venerable sailor.
“Dash me, but you shall have many a day of rest, and many a day of jollity too, my old stock-fish. Why, you don't think that I am such a flint-hearted twaddler, but I can honour grey hairs, and find out an honest soul among a million? Do you know who I am?—Why, dash me, I am Lord Kencarth—Did you never hear of me in your Welsh hovel,
[Page 63]
my dainty?—Queer my nobility, why I thought every body knew me.”
The chaise drew up to the door, and my generous pupil, taking the sailor's arm, helped him to mount the step:— “Come, tumble up, my deep one,” cried his lordship: “the wind sets fair for a safe port, and you have nothing to do but to keep still between decks.--- Dash my jasey, but you're in luck, my jolly! so have a stout heart, and I'll pay the reckoning—till we balance our accounts at doomsday.”
The chaise drove on, and I returned with my noble pupil to the parlour.
Lord Kencarth being determined to remain that night with the victorious pugilist, who was in a perilous situation, I retired early to my chamber. The day had been a busy one, and my brain was fatigued with the perpetual changes of sensation that had pervaded every fibre. When I reflected on the long
[Page 64]
life of solitary anguish which old Griffith had been destined to experience, I shrunk at my own restless spirit, which had so frequently betrayed me into impatience, bordering on despair. Weary with thinking, I laid my head upon my pillow; but the tenour of my thoughts, though sleeping, still turned upon the events of the last twelve hours, till I was startled from a feverish dream which presented the following vision.—
   Lost on a rock of dreadful height,
   And shrowded by the gloom of night,
      A weary Exile stood!
   No wintry star its feeble ray
   Shot forth to point the craggy way,
Or guide his devious steps to shun the foamy flood!
   Above, the warring tempest howl'd,
   And near the rav'nous She-Wolf prowl'd,
      A cataract plung'd below!
   He shrunk!—The bleak blast yell'd around,
   He totter'd o'er the gulph profound,
While ev'ry startled sense was agoniz'd by woe!
[Page 65]
   For, robb'd of joy, of peace bereft,
   Adversity no balsam left,
      To heal the stings of scorn;
   No sigh of love his pain beguil'd,
   On him no friend, no kindred smil'd,
To draw from memory's wound affliction's rankling thorn!
   Disdain'd by fortune, stung by art,
   And tortur'd with a feeling heart,
      Which hope had left to break!
   His sigh was lost amid the blast,
   And Fancy, madd'ning on the past,
Bade tears, corroding tears, steal down his wither'd cheek.
   Then why should he, with haggard eye,
   Start from the she-wolf prowling nigh,
      Or dread the gulph below?
   Why totter o'er the dreadful steep,
   And bear the pelting storm, and weep,
When one short step would end the tyranny of woe?
   Poor Exile ! why such fears endure,
   When Nature's hand presents a cure,
      Which only death can give?
   Methinks the wretched wand'rer cries—
   “ Guilt seeks the grave;—the Coward dies;
“While Virtue nobly dares to suffer and to live !”
[Page 66]
CHAP. LXXV. I found that my slumber was broken by Lord Kencarth, who had entered my chamber to tell me that his pocket had been picked during his absence the preceding evening, and that his loss amounted to a no less sum than four hundred pounds. I instantly rose and dressed myself; a chaise and four was ordered, and three hours before day-break we set out for London. In sixty-nine minutes we reached Hanover-square—His lordship's town residence was spacious, and every thing about it evinced expence, bordering on prodigality.
As soon as we had done breakfast, we departed on foot for the Police-office, to give information of the robbery: in our way thither, passing through a narrow
[Page 67]
street near Piccadilly, we observed a chariot driving with terrible speed before us. The coachman was evidently intoxicated, and the horses, being high-spirited, suddenly turning the corner, overset the carriage on the pavement.
“Dish my sconce, but this is a pretty spot of work!” exclaimed Lord Kencarth, darting forward, and seizing the reins, while the horses continued plunging, and the inebriated coachman lay senseless on the footway. I opened the door, and by the only glimmering lamp that remained burning, could just perceive a female reclined in the corner of the carriage. By her making no effort to emancipate herself from her confinement, I concluded that she had fainted, and, with Lord Kencarth's assistance, lifted her from the chariot, and placing her on the step of a street-door, left her to the care of my pupil, while I flew to St. James's-street for a chair. Fortunately
[Page 68]
I found one, and the lady was placed in it, still totally insensible to all that was passing.
The coachman, being severely wounded on the head and stunned by his fall, my companion undertook to lead him to a surgeon's in the neighbourhood, while I walked before the chairmen to Hanover-square.
The dawn began to break just as we entered the house, and the chair being placed in the hall, I opened the door to release the terrified incognita, when my astonishment was awakened by the sight of Isabella. She was just recovering from her swoon, and, looking at me as though she beheld a spectre, she feebly articulated— “Oh, Heavens! where am I, and how came I hither?”
Rising from her seat with more resolution than strength, she advanced a step forward, and, trembling with apprehension, eagerly snatched hold of the chairman's
[Page 69]
arm, again exclaiming— “Whither have you brought me? Speak, or I shall expire with terror.”
“You are safe, Miss Hanbury,” said I; “and I trust that you will not feel an augmentation of alarm, in knowing that you are under my protection. This house is Lady Kencarth's.”
“Then I am safe,” cried Isabella, smiling, and recovering from her surprise.
“You would have been equally so, had it been any other,” said I, taking her hand and leading her to the drawing-room; she looked round her, and viewed every object with an eye of suspicion. At length, making me a formal curtsey, she replied— “I am much indebted to you for your kindness, Mr. Ainsforth; after what has passed, I really did not expect such an instance of attention.— You will enhance the obligation by
[Page 70]
ordering a servant to call me another chair, and to attend me to Lady Aubrey's.”
The coldness of her manner and the severity of her reproof, took from me the power of utterance—I rung the bell —a servant entered the room—and after some hesitation I obeyed her commands. She smiled, and ceremoniously thanked me.
“Did you say to Lady Aubrey's?” cried I with a hesitating voice.
“I did,” replied Isabella gravely.
“Astonishing!” exclaimed I. “Forgive me, Miss Hanbury, but I cannot hide the sentiment I feel—the mystery of your whole conduct—”
“The mystery!” repeated Isabella, somewhat piqued;“now you are indeed taking upon you the authority of a friend.”
“Have I no claim to the title?” said I.
[Page 71]
“None!” answered Isabella— “You have forfeited all claims to friendship as well as to confidence.”
“How? tell me, I conjure you.”
“By your ingratitude to Colonel Aubrey, and your perfidy to Miss Woodford.”
I shrunk and was silent.
“Have you any commands to Lady Aubrey?—She arrived in town only yesterday, and in a few days will return to Glenowen,” said Miss Hanbury.
“I have no friends at Glenowen,” answered I, throwing myself on a sofa, and almost frantic— “Perish every thing that belongs to it.”
“My brother would little thank you, Mr. Ainsforth, if he heard your wish.”
“Why, why will you urge me on to madness, and then condemn me because I am a maniac. I respect, I revere your brother, Isabella—but he has, like the
[Page 72]
rest of the world, abandoned both me and my fortunes.”
“Why did you never write to him?” said Isabella earnestly.
“I did write frequently, but my letters were unanswered.”
“He never received them,” interrupted Miss Hanbury; “and most probably they were intercepted.”
“By whom?” said I.
“By Mrs. Blagden—Certain I am, that there has been treachery somewhere,” continued Isabella; “for every transaction of your life has been regularly communicated to Lady Aubrey, and by her repeated to my brother.— Lady Emily Delvin's letter, informing us of your rash and criminal conduct towards her, and of her lenity in suffering you to escape, was not the least prominent event in the long catalogue of your indiscretions.”
[Page 73]
“And did you believe me such a villain?”
Isabella turned towards the window, but made no answer.
“Speak, I conjure you,” continued I; “acquit me of the charge; for by all that it is dear to honour —”
“Hold, Mr. Ainsforth! remember Amelia Woodford, and do not profane the word,” said Miss Hanbury: “talk not of faith at the very moment that you are an avowed apostate. Reason, gratitude, and humanity plead against you, and charge you with a violation of their laws; while every feeling, every honourable mind, condemns you.”
“Miss Woodford was her own destroyer—I was an involuntary seducer; I meant not to betray her; I formed no premeditated plan against her honour; for even on that fatal night, when she fell a victim to my despair—I took her for another.”
[Page 74]
“For whom did you take her?”
The question struck my brain like electricity. I was convulsed in every joint—she smiled insultingly. Love, rage, revenge, again assailed my soul. I snatched her to my heart—she shrieked, and at the same moment Lord Kencarth rushed into the drawing-room.
“Oh, my Lord!” exclaimed Isabella, “rescue me from this monster!”
“My Lord, I command your absence,” said I; “this lady is my property.”
“Indeed, my Lord,” said Miss Hanbury, “there is not a syllable of truth in what Mr. Ainsforth utters. I came hither under his protection, and he has insulted me like a ruffian. Let me intreat that you will accompany me to Lady Aubrey's.”
“O ho! is it so, my little one?” cried Lord Kencarth, whistling and folding his arms as he fixed his eyes on Isabella. “Dish my jasey, but this is Sir Sidney's
[Page 75]
mistress! Why you need not have been so squeamish, my dainty; for, dash my wig, if Ainsforth is not as well-looking as your finical Welsh baronet. I like to do a good-natured thing as well as any body; but queer my caxon, if I'll take you to any Sir Sidney in Christendom, unless Ainsforth desires me.”
“Do you know me, my Lord?” said Isabella sternly.
“I know that you are d—d handsome,” replied his lordship— “and that's as much as I want to know.”
So saying, he caught her hand, and with easy familiarity drew her towards him. She resisted—I began to fear that some new insult would be offered her; for though I had violated the laws of propriety towards her myself, I could not permit another to follow my example.
Lord Kencarth now caught her in his arms, and would have forced a kiss from her—she burst into tears, and turning
[Page 76]
towards me, exclaimed— “O God! is it Walsingham who refuses to protect me?”
I sprung from the sofa, and tearing her from the arms of my young pupil, conjured her to believe that my conduct and my life were at her disposal.
Lord Kencarth, at a loss to comprehend the meaning of my conduct, gazed on Miss Hanbury for several minutes with silent astonishment— “Quiz my nobility!” exclaimed he, “who does she belong to? She talks of Lady Aubrey— you say she is your property—and I know she is the mistress of Sir Sidney. Return to Lady Aubrey she shan't — stay with you she won't —and therefore go with me she must . Dish my jasey, if I won't give you a viz and a settlement; and you shall sport a better establishment, have more diamonds— and the finest cattle of any woman in the three kingdoms: and dash my wig,
[Page 77]
if you shan't put all the gallant grandmothers in the circle of St. James's out of countenance, for the first time in their lives, my dainty; and when we have lived together till the town has done talking, why then, queer my connections if I don't marry you.”
Miss Hanbury, no longer able to bear Lord Kencarth's language, rung the bell violently; and, rushing out of the room, was hastening towards the street-door, when I flew to overtake her. She darted into the street, and though splendidly dressed, (for she was returning from Lady Amaranth's assembly when the accident happened,) she proceeded on foot across the square. It was not more than seven o'clock; and a robe of silver muslin with a towering plume of white feathers were but ill-adapted to a morning walk in the streets of the metropolis.
[Page 78]
CHAP. LXXVI. Miss Hanbury continued to walk hastily, and I to attend her, without either of us uttering a syllable. The stern indignation which was pictured in her countenance, convinced me that every attempt to palliate my conduct would prove fruitless; I therefore consoled myself with the idea that, by accompanying her, I should discover the abode of Lady Aubrey; and I resolved to wait patiently for some future opportunity, when her mind should be more disposed to hear my extenuation. She stopped at a door in Lower Brooke-street, and knocking vehemently, it was presently opened by a servant, whose joy at seeing her was too evident to escape my notice. I bowed, and left her; she entered the house, and
[Page 79]
I hastened towards Hanover-square to explain the morning's adventure.
I found Lord Kencarth with a thronged levee of personages, as various in the professions as in their outward forms— boxers, jockies, language-masters, gamblers, French dancers, and English tradesmen, thronged his lordship's antichamber, and were waiting for separate audiences—his Swiss valet attending the word of command, as master of the ceremonies.
On entering Lord Kencarth's dressing room, I found him engaged in giving instructions to the police officer for the recovery of his pocket-book.— “Mind, my hearty, if the vagabond has any family, or you believe that it is his first offence, you must tip him the blink, and think no more of the matter. I should be sorry to transport a poor knave, dash my jasey; but if he is one of your deep ones, nab him, my knowing one, and
[Page 80]
give him a sea-voyage to mend his morality.”
“I take you, my Lord; I vill, you may depend on my behaving handsome, my Lord. I ben't von of your sneakers—I alvays acts upon honour, and knows ven I am benefiting the community. But, my Lord, I hope you vill indemnify me in case of accidents— I may get a leaden habeas to the next vorld, or be turned out of my proféssion for too much lenity; and then you know, my Lord—”
“Quiz you for a deep one!” cried Lord Kencarth— “There, you twaddler, there's five guineas for you—so now dish yourself off, and keep your own counsel.”
The man of justice vanished, and Monsieur Beauvais next ushered in Mr. Hedge, a gentleman well known on the turf, no less for his successful enterprises than for his invincible courage. Mr.
[Page 81]
Hedge had fought four duels in England, five on the continent, and had, by indefatigable industry, acquired a fortune sufficiently independent to dub him comme il faut in the circles of dissipation, though his first entrance into the world was from the obscurity of an oystercellar, and the occupation of his youth was that of an itinerant tinker. As he grew up, Nature bestowed on him a handsome person, and Fortune, jealous of her rival's power, threw him in the way of a buxom widow, who, thinking he would continue to mend, bewitched and married him. She did not long survive the union—and at the end of six months her disconsolate husband formed an alliance with a strolling actress —a lady whose pleasing voice and liberal patronage have since been the theme of public admiration. By this lady's interest with persons of high rank, Mr. Hedge obtained a commission in the
[Page 82]
army, assumed the name of Captain, and divided his hours between the turf and the hazard-table; till intoxicated by the success of his undertakings, and grown into consequence, the cellar, the tinker's budget, the buxom widow, and the tuneful patroness were entirely forgotten.
Mr. Hedge made my pupil a morning visit to receive a cool five hundred, which he had won the preceding week at Newmarket.—Lord Kencarth, though not present at the race, knew Mr. Hedge to be a man of honour, and the debt was paid by a draft on his banker without a moment's hesitation.
The next visitor ushered into the audience-chamber was Mr. Topas, the jeweller, another personage of infinite honesty.
Mr. Topas advanced with a bow of profound veneration; and taking a small
[Page 83]
morocco case out of his pocket, thus addressed my pupil—
“Brought your Lordship a bijou of infinite beauty—a pink diamond of the first water—belonged formerly to an illustrious but unfortunate female personage —cost three thousand guineas at Vienna—can sell it for half the sum.”
“Quiz me! if I ever saw such a thing as a pink diamond since I opened my peepers!” cried Lord Kencarth. Then taking the case from the jeweller, he continued: “Dish my wig! if it isn't the neat thing, Ainsforth!—Have you any more of the same sort?”
The jeweller replied, “The only one in the kingdom;—the largest in Europe, my Lord: had it only weighed three grains more, it would have been worth any money. By day its lustre is orient and dazzling, but by candle-light its splendour is not to be described! Seven persons of the first rank have sent
[Page 84]
for me to shew it them. I thought that your lordship might like to have it, and gratitude for past favours induced me to give your lordship the preference.”
“I'll have it, by all that's quizzical,” cried his lordship. “Dish me, if it sha'n't put out the peepers of twenty dowagers to-morrow night at the opera.”
I shook my head, and whispered, “Take time to reflect:—have the jewel valued.”
Mr. Topas again addressed his lordship:— “My Lord, you will never meet with such a magnificent gem during your lordship's life:—it is fit to adorn the hand of a prince. Shall I leave it? Suffer me to put your lordship's name on my books for fifteen hundred—a mere trifle, when the transcendent beauty of the jewel is considered. Mrs. Begum has sent to look at it, but I thought it my duty first to wait upon your lordship.”
[Page 85]
“O! dash my wig if I don't have it,” cried my pupil.
Again I ventured to check his arm, and to whisper— “Beware.”
“Can't I keep it a day or two to consider of it?” said his lordship.
“Why—my Lord,”—replied Mr. Topas, hesitating as if to form an excuse, “I have promised to shew it to several persons of fashion this morning; and, to tell your lordship the truth, a foreigner of distinction is in treaty for it, to embellish the crown of the Empress of Russia:—a day's neglect may prevent my disposing of it to infinite advantage; and I am sure that your lordship would not wish me to sustain any loss by obliging you.”
“Mayn't I shew it to a jewelgrinder? Dash my jasey, if I am any judge of diamonds,” said Lord Kencarth.
I nodded my approbation of the proposal.
[Page 86]
“Why, my Lord, I have pledged my word of honour to the owner of the jewel, who is a person of very considerable rank, an emigré of distinction, not to expose the diamond to any of the trade:—the value would be considerably diminished by its being hawked about, and the article is so uncommonly beautiful, that I am sure of a purchaser if your lordship does not like it. I have no motive, my Lord, but to oblige your lordship, as a person of taste, and one of my best customers.”
Mr. Topas was replacing the jewel in its case, with all imaginable sang froid , when Lord Kencarth desired once more to look at it.
“Dish me, if it isn't the neat thing, Ainsforth! I should like to have it, because nobody else has got such a one,” cried my pupil.
“Fifteen hundred guineas might be better employed,” said I.
[Page 87]
“I do not wish to be paid,” said Mr. Topas, bowing obsequiously. “The honour of his lordship's name upon my books is quite sufficient: I shall wait my Lord's own time: we have some little account now standing—a mere trifle—about seven thousand.”
“Dish my nobility, how do you make that out? It was only two thousand but three months ago,” said my pupil. “Why, you're going your lengths, my deep one.”
“Your lordship shall hear the items: I have a memorandum in my pocket-book, which I made when I took the orders,” said Mr. Topas, taking out a large porte-feuille and reading.
“Six pair of new-invented spring shoe-buckles—seven gold watch-chains —a brilliant fausse-montre for Lady Alltrap—a ditto set of fan-sticks for the Duchess of Riversford—a diamond opera-glass for Kitty Bronze—your
[Page 88]
lordship's hair, set with large pearls, for Miss Amoret; and an ivory pin-case for your lordship's mother. Your lordship will be pleased to recollect, that you also ordered a dozen diamond hoop-rings to make presents, and a ceinture of rubies for Lord Faircourt's mistress the pretty actress:—besides some gold toys for Mrs. Winkwell's daughter, and an emerald Shamrock for Mrs. O'Liffy.”
“Queer my sconce! if it is not all as right as my eye; but I must have the pink diamond notwithstanding; it will always sell for the money,” cried my pupil.
Again I conjured him to reflect.
“Sell, my Lord!—why any jeweller in Europe will give you the sum you pay for it, after you have worn it a whole winter, my Lord,” said Mr. Topas. “Besides, your lordship should recollect, that diamonds were never at so low a price as at this juncture. The unfortunate
[Page 89]
nobility of France have overstocked the markets, and jewels of every denomination are become a mere drug, my Lord. Had not this been the case, your lordship would not have purchased this superb bijou for less than three thousand. Think of the difference, my Lord: in less than a twelvemonth it will be worth its original price. Take it to the side-light, my Lord; it has all the vivid and transcendent colours of the rainbow, with the lucid lustre of the whitest brilliant! Nothing can be more orientally superb! It would embellish the cabinet of the Grand Sultan, as it once did the most beautiful hand in the universe! Suffer me to leave it:—permit me to inform the nobility, that your lordship is the purchaser. There is not its equal in Europe:—your lordship will have it then?—Thank you, my Lord—much obliged to your lordship---”
[Page 90]
Lord Kencarth placed the gem upon his finger, and was moving it with dazzling velocity, when he exclaimed,— “Quiz my nobility, but I must have it! Mind, Topas, I sha'n't pay you these three months.
“Three years, my Lord,—and I shall be honoured by your kindness,” replied the obliging Mr. Topas.— “Thank you, my Lord. I must go and make my excuses to Mrs. Begum, and the long list of nobility who are now waiting to see the diamond. I intreat your lordship not to mention the sum you gave for it: I sent a refusal of an hundred more only yesterday, to a particular friend, but your lordship's exquisite taste does honour to your tradesmen;—and whatever you wear, my Lord, cannot fail to become the fashion. Hope your lordship will not trust the bijou out of your hands, or suffer it to be played tricks with by
[Page 91]
any of the trade.—Thank your lordship—your lordship's most obedient.”
Mr. Topas withdrew, and Monsieur Volage, the French opera-dancer, entered the dressing-room.
“Milor,” cried the undaunted Volage, “I come to beg your lorship's protection a mon benefice, samedi prochaine a l'opera:—ven I shall give un grand ballet, de most superb and magnifique dat vas ever give in dis country! Toute la noblesse ma promis to come: mais—l'opera vill be noting vidout de presence of Milor Kencat.”
“What does he say, Ainsforth?” inquired my pupil— “Dish my wig, if ever I heard such gibberish.”
“No understand dish vig,” cried Volage. “Je suis tres fache if I have offend milor—mais I have dispose of tree tousand ticket pour mon benefice, von guinea chacun: and I pray milor to take von demi douzaine aussi.”
[Page 92]
“Well, that will do,” cried my pupil— “give your tongue a holiday; leave your damme dozen—and go it—budge —be moving.”
“No understand!” muttered Monsieur Volage, with his shoulders raised somewhat above his ears, and his countenance ridiculously expressive of astonishment.
“Budge—take yourself off—dash my jasey, but you can hop fast enough at the crotechet shop.”
“Jasee! hop!—que veut dire, milor? je n'comprend pas un mot—j'espere que monseigneur vill honneur mon benefice vid his presence,” cried Volage.
“Why, I tell you, I'll come. So now stop your gab—and put your pins in motion,” said Lord Kencarth.
“No understand!” cried the dancer.
“You may depend on his lordship's patronage,” said I, “but he is at present
[Page 93]
particularly engaged, and wishes you to leave him.”
“No understand.”
“Quiz my caxon! here's a rouleau for your damme dozen,” said my pupil. “Now what say you?”
“Ah! je comprend bien!” cried the delighted Monsieur Volage, making fifty bows and retiring; when my pupil seizing him by the arm, exclaimed, “Dish my sconce, mounseer, did you ever see a pink diamond? Now, my dainty!—feast your peepers; here's an affair—cost me fifteen hundred guineas not ten minutes ago: there isn't such another in the kingdom—dash my wig if there is.”
“Cette une tres joli bijou ! mais pardonnez moi, monseigneur—it is not brilliant,” cried Monsieur Volage.”
“That's a good one. Dash my jasey! what a rum judge you must be, not to know a bijou from a brilliant.”
[Page 94]
“En verité, milor, it is not diamant,” cried Monsieur Volage.
“Will you pretend to know better than Mr. Topas the jeweller?” said Lord Kencarth. “Dash my wig, if you Frenchmen don't think to teach the whole universe: but I know that a diamond is a diamond, and queer my caxon if I won't stand to it, if all the world said to the contrary. So, Mounseer Volage, you may be jogging,—and cut your capers for those that will believe you. Not a diamond!—Dash my jasey, if I would sell it for half my estate—let the other be where it will. Here, Beauvais, shew out Volage,—and shew in somebody else.”
The next person who presented himself was Mr. Pannel the coachmaker.
“I waited on your lordship with a drawing of a new carriage—quite in style, my Lord—very elegant—light as a feather, and totally unlike any thing
[Page 95]
that was ever seen before. Your lordship cannot fail to patronize it. I have not shewn the design to any body, till I consulted your lordship's taste,” said Mr. Pannel.
“What is it like? Is it the neat thing? Will it beat my tandem? Answer me that, my dainty,” cried my pupil.
“My Lord, it is the most perfect thing of the kind that ever was invented! An infant may draw it. It will follow a pair of horses twelve miles an hour with all the ease imaginable. Only observe the construction of the springs, my Lord;—the lightness of the body;— the elegance of the whole carriage. I have not shewn it to a single person, my Lord, for I thought your lordship would like to have the first.”
“What do you call it?” said my pupil.
[Page 96]
“Why, my Lord—if your lordship will patronize the invention, I shall request your lordship's permission to call it— a Kencarth .”
“O! dash my jasey, but I'll have one!” exclaimed his lordship. “When can you put it in hand?—how long will it be making?—what will it cost?—Dish me, but I gave you two hundred for a phaeton last month, and I have never used it but once—you must take it back;—what will you allow me for it?”
Mr. Pannel demurred—
“Fashions change every day, my Lord,” said he, pausing:— “Phaetons are going out;—had it been a curricle, I might have found a purchaser;—but, to accommodate your lordship, I will allow you—fifty guineas, and I shall then be a loser.”
“What say you, Ainsforth?” cried my pupil, “shall I sport a Kencarth,
[Page 97]
and swap my Highflyer for fifty?— Queer my caxon, but it will be the knowing thing to have a carriage of one's own name.”
“If your lordship will take my advice, it will be to relinquish the idea,” said I. “The drawing seems to promise neither elegance nor utility; it will be an expensive bauble, and you will never use it.”
“His lordship's name will give it fashion,” said Mr. Pannel.
“You are right, my dainty,” cried my pupil; “and dish me, but I'll have one; if only to drive Lady Alltrap about the streets in.”
“Indeed, it will be ridiculously singular,” said I.
“That's the very reason why I am determined to have it,” replied Lord Kencarth. “But heark'ye, my neat Pannel, how do I stand upon your books?—tell me that.”
[Page 98]
“Something above four thousand, my Lord; including Lady Alltrap's landau:— a mere trifle.”
“Well!—do you want to be paid? tell me that, my trusty?—I can't give you any money this winter; I must deal all upon tick. I have a little outrun the constable; but shall pick up again next spring.”
Mr. Pannel looked blue.
“What say you?” cried my pupil, “tick, and no touch—is that the order of the day, my deep-one?”
“Your lordship's credit with me is unbounded,” said Mr. Pannel bowing.
“The Kencartb shall be ready in six weeks.”
“But you will allow his lordship more than fifty guineas for his phaeton?” said I.
Mr. Pannel again hesitated, and Lord Kencarth whispered, “D---me, don't bore upon the subject, left he should dun me.”
[Page 99]
Mr. Pannel took his leave, and I left my pupil to receive the rest of his morning visitors, while I strolled towards Lady Aubrey's to inquire after the health of Isabella.
I had not proceeded more than half across the square, when Lord Kencarth's valet-de-chambre, Beauvais, ran after me, and requested that, if I was going to call upon the lady whom I had brought with me in the morning, I would take charge of a medallion which she had left upon the sofa. I examined the trinket; it was encircled with large diamonds, with hair curiously woven, and the letters S. A. in a cypher on the centre. There remained not a doubt in my own mind, but that the hair and initials were Sir Sidney's; the medallion a present from him to Isabella. The sensation which pressed upon my heart was a painful one, and, with more than ordinary agitation, I hastened to Lady
[Page 100]
Aubrey's to restore the precious pledge of love to the sordid object of my too tender attachment, and to bid her, and her detested lover, adieu for ever!
CHAP. LXXVII. I knocked at Lady Aubrey's door, and on giving my name to the servant, he informed me that he had her ladyship's orders to say, she never should be at home to Mr. Ainsforth. I inquired after Miss Hanbury's health, and was answered that she was not yet awake. I left my card for the latter, and my contempt for the former, and was returning home, when, at the end of Brooke-street, I met Sir Sidney.
He hastened towards me, and with a countenance pleased and ingenuous, expressed his joy at once more finding
[Page 101]
me. “I had rather meet you on terms of friendship in Brooke-street, believe me,” said he, “than armed against your life in Hyde Park.”
I recollected my last interview with Sir Sidney, and my heart shuddered. He pressed me to return with him. “You must make your peace with my mother,” said he; “and, if possible, supplant her new favourite.”
“Has Lady Aubrey feeling enough to shew kindness to any thing?” said I smiling.
“The nephew of Mrs. Blagden is now her chief counsellor,” cried Sir Sidney; “young Edward Blagden. Indeed so great a favourite is this new protegée , that I have some apprehension she means to marry him.”
“Is he worthy of her choice?” said I.
“He is young and well-looking,” replied Sir Sidney; “just such a fellow
[Page 102]
as would captivate a woman's heart before she took the trouble to consult her understanding. But you must return with me, and judge from observation, whether you think either his external graces, or his mental qualities, such as entitle him to Lady Aubrey's favour.”
I now informed Sir Sidney of the message which my aunt had left with her servant:—he started. “You know where she resides then?” said he, with evident emotion. “Have you met my mother since her return to town?”
“I have not met Lady Aubrey,” was my answer.
“Perhaps,” continued Sir Sidney, growing red, and hesitating, “you have seen—Isabella?”
“Even so.”
“Lately?” cried my cousin, with increased agitation.
“Last night—or rather this morning.”
[Page 103]
“Is it possible!” exclaimed Sir Sidney. “Can woman be so treacherous?—You must have been mistaken—it could not be Isabella. I left her at Lady Amaranth's; she complained that the heat of a crowded room overcame her: I went home to order my carriage; and, on my return, found that she had taken Mrs. O'Liffy's chariot and quitted the assembly. Since that moment I have never seen her: it was day-light when I returned to my mother's house, and I concluded that Isabella was sleeping.”
“She was not sleeping at seven this morning,” said I.
Sir Sidney's colour changed from red to the paleness of a corpse. “You were certainly mistaken,” cried he; “how was she drest?—Give me some proof that you saw her. This is a serious business, Walsingham; and my peace of mind is not to be trifled with.”
“She wore a robe of silver muslin,”
[Page 104]
said I; “her head was adorned with a plume of white feathers.”
Sir Sidney reeled against a shop window, and taking my hand, faintly articulated— “Since your better genius has prevailed, I can only wish you happy, and bid you farewel for ever. I hoped, Walsingham, that time, and my regard for Isabella, would have alienated your affections, and secured her friendship; as it is, Heaven bless you!”
His manner was mournfully impressive; his cheek and lip were as white as marble. I stood like a statue, without power to answer him: he walked slowly along the pavement towards Bond-street.
Thinking that I had carried the jest beyond the bounds of humanity, I followed my cousin till he reached Pall Mall. He stopped at the Cocoa-tree, and desired a waiter to order a postchaise and four to be got ready as
[Page 105]
speedily as possible. He did not observe me, though I stood not ten paces from him. Having dispatched the messenger, he entered the house. I paused a moment to consider what step was most advisable to take, when a thought darted across my brain that, probably, he meditated suicide. I entered the coffee-room;—he was not there. I inquired of the waiter where he was, and he informed me that Sir Sidney had called for pen, ink, and paper, and was shewn into a private drawing-room. “Tell him that Mr. Ainsforth wishes to see him,” said I.
The waiter flew to deliver my message, and I thought every moment an age till he brought back the answer, which was, that “Sir Sidney Aubrey, being particularly engaged, could not then see me.”
Determined not to take a refusal, I desired the waiter to shew me the room
[Page 106]
where Sir Sidney was, and he instantly obeying, I entered without ceremony. My cousin rose abruptly from his seat, and hastily exclaimed— “By Heaven, Walsingham, this persecution is insupportable! —Is there no spot upon the habitable globe where I can hope for rest?—What do you wish? Are you determined to destroy me? Will nothing less than my destruction satisfy your revenge?—Oh, God!” continued Sir Sidney, “a few weeks, a few short weeks, would have elucidated every mystery!—But Fate has interposed, and I resign myself to wretchedness.”
“Then, at last, you experience a small portion of the anguish which, for months, you have made me suffer,” said I. “But, to convince you that I am less obstinate in malice than you have been in persecution, I will confess, that—”
[Page 107]
“What?” cried Sir Sidney eagerly. “Speak!—my brain is burning with the fever of despair. Oh, Walsingham! ungenerous Walsingham! what a deceitful fiend is Isabella!—Only three days since she avowed her passion for another, and now, to torture me, she makes you the dupe of her deception.”
“Whom did she avow to love?” said I earnestly.
Sir Sidney smiled. “It is of little importance,” answered he; “the triumph is yours, and the humiliation will follow as certain as that the night succeeds the day. I shall not live to see it—thank Heaven I shall not.”
“I conjure you, tell me to whom Isabella has transferred her affections?” said I.
“I do not comprehend the term,” replied my cousin. “Affections cannot be transferred that never yet were fixed.”
[Page 108]
“Then Isabella is doubly criminal,” interrupted I; “for the woman who bestows her person, where she can with-hold her heart, is the most culpable of beings: the venal wanton is not more guilty.—But this is trifling.—You, who were the seducer of Isabella, should be the last to calumniate her name. From you she is entitled to protection; and that slander, which fails to depreciate her merit, stigmatizes you as the most infamous of mortals.”
Sir Sidney walked hastily about the room, gnawing his lip, and looking like a maniac. I continued:—
“From this hour, Sir Sidney, we must part for ever;—I was born to hate you. From the early days of infancy, your very name has been the bane of my repose; in every path of still retirement, your malice crossed me. I flew to the busy scenes of life; thither you traced my footsteps. The solitudes
[Page 109]
of mountains, and the crowds of cities, have been explored in vain; your persecuting spirit still pursued its victim, and my native country can afford no shelter from the tyranny of your malevolence: —I shall therefore fly. In a few days I shall depart for the Continent.”
Sir Sidney threw himself into a chair, and fixing his eyes in wildness on the ground, made me no answer. I proceeded:—
“Fortune has placed you on an eminence which enables you to look down on persecuted individuals—”
“Oh! curse my fortune!” interrupted Sir Sidney. “Take, take it, Walsingham: I shall not want it long!— You will remember me with regret, your heart will ache with compunction, when I shall be in the grave, and tranquil. But whatever your inhuman malice may suggest—whether to evince your triumph, or to stigmatize my memory
[Page 110]
—I charge you, if honour is yet dear to man, or pity due to a weak, foolish, erring woman, guard, oh! guard, and respect the misguided Isabella.”
“She shall have my pit,” answered I; “and, unquestionably, the world will allow her all the respect which is due to the mistress of Sir Sidney Aubrey.”
“She never was my mistress. By all my hopes of happiness beyond the grave, I swear that Isabella never was my mistress,” replied Sir Sidney. “Time will develope the dark mystery; for the fates alone can unravel that clue which will lead the angel, Pity, to the grave of the ill-fated Sidney.”
He burst into tears, and wept like a woman: every drop he shed augmented my jealousy, and strengthened my determination to punish Isabella. After a pause of several minutes I approached my cousin, and drawing the medallion from my pocket, presented it to him.
[Page 111]
CHAP. LXXVIII. Sir Sidney snatched the medallion from my hand, dashed it on the floor;— and rising abruptly, darted out of the room. The glass which covered the initials was shattered into a thousand pieces;—the cypher broken, and several of the brilliants unset by the violence with which they struck the ground. This unlucky event involved me in a new dilemma. I could not return the medallion to Miss Hanbury, so defaced; and to keep it would be unpardonable. There was no way of accounting for the accident, but by telling the truth;—and even that would subject me not only to her contempt, but her reproaches. After a pause of some minutes, which I devoted to reflection, I determined to wait on Isabella, to restore the medallion, and
[Page 112]
to confess every circumstance of the transaction.
I immediately set out for Brookestreet, and on the door being opened, the first person I saw was Mrs. Blagden. The grim visage of a fury would have been personified meekness, in comparison with the features of my ancient antagonist. I requested to speak with Miss Hanbury. Mrs. Blagden informed me that there was no such person in the house. I entered the parlour, and Mrs. Blagden followed. “What do you want?” said she peevishly. “My lady has long since determined never to see you more, therefore you only lose your time in pestering her ladyship. Besides, I wonder at your assurance to enter these doors while I am here:—you ought to recollect how you always behaved to me, and how basely you attempted to murder Sir Sidney.”
[Page 113]
“I wish to see Miss Hanbury,” said I.
“Miss Hanbury is no company for you, I tell you once more,” cried the harpy Blagden. “There is not a lord in the land, who would not be proud to marry my lady and Miss Hanbury too. Indeed, if I don't mistake, my lady will not be a widow long. I am sure I shall advise her to take a husband, if only to get rid of her beggarly relations.”
“Can I see Miss Hanbury?” repeated I.
Mrs. Blagden paid no regard to my question, but throwing herself into a chair, continued:—
“My lady has found a person at last, thank God! who will know how to value her kindness.—A young man, and as handsome a one too as ever wore a head;—and not a vagrant neither; for he shall have all my savings, and I can
[Page 114]
give him a few thousands, though you have been pleased to turn up your nose at me. All my life have I been toiling and slaving like a negro, and got no thanks neither. But my lady has at last found out who are her friends, and who are her foes;—and my nephew, Edward Blagden, will do honour to her ladyship's taste,—and reward me for all the ill usage I have met with.”
“Can I speak with Miss Hanbury?” said I.
“And as for Sir Sidney, I don't care a pin,” cried Mrs. Blagden, with a malicious sneer. “He is no better than he should be;—but it will all come out; —my nephew Edward will set things to rights, I'll warrant you. He won't be put upon, as I have been. And as for you, and your good-for-nothing tutor Mr. Hanbury, my nephew Edward shall give you both a sound drubbing, if you
[Page 115]
play off any more of your tricks upon me or my lady. I know what you have been at;—I heard of your killing the poor woman, and robbing the lady;— and for half a farthing I would tell all the world how you attempted to break open my lady's cabinet, and to shoot Sir Sidney.”
I smiled.
“You may shew your teeth, and outface it, Mister Impudence,” continued Mrs. Blagden; “but time will bring all things to light, and you will then laugh the wrong side of your mouth, Mister Brazenface:—and if you don't make the best of your way out of my lady's house, I shall send for a constable, and shew you who is mistress here, Mister Vagabond.”
“When you have wearied that brawling tongue of yours, I will beg you to take a message for me to Miss Hanbury,” said I.
[Page 116]
Mrs. Blagden bounded from her seat, and advancing towards me, like a shedragon, vociferated—
“ I carry a message!— I be your lacquey!—I wonder at your insolence. I wish my nephew was here to give you your deserts, you frightful ugly jackanapes! —But I sha'n't stand here wasting my breath;—I shall make you know that I am my lady's best friend, and the mistress of this house, at least.” So faying, she rung the bell violently. A servant entered. “Here, Andrew,” cried she, “turn this fellow out of doors. You had orders never to admit him, and I wonder at you for disobeying my lady's commands.”
“My honest friend,” said I, perceiving the embarrassment which Mrs. Blagden's extraordinary request occasioned, “you need not trouble yourself, nor offend me. I am little inclined to bear an insult: my mind is not easily quieted
[Page 117]
when I am once roused to exert it. I only wish to speak five words with Miss Hanbury;—will you convey my message to her?”
“At your peril!—at your peril, I say!” vociferated Mrs. Blagden.
“You need na be sae clamorous; I shan'na take part with either, till I ken baith sides o'th' business,” replied Andrew, taking out his leathern snuff-box, and viewing me attentively.
“Turn him out!” vociferated Mrs. Blagden.
“I shall do na sic thing,” cried the honest North-Briton. “The lad's a braw lad, an I wad be laith to do an ill turn by sic a faire spaken gentleman. An a' were a saucy loon, like some that I ken i'th' world, I canna say how fare the blude o'th' Mac-Gregors—”
“Will you obey my orders, or will you not, you idle gossiping old blockhead?” cried Mrs. Blagden.
[Page 118]
“You need na be sae hasty!” cried Andrew; “I say nathing but gude sense and gude discreetion. The lad's bonie lad!—an I were sure to be made the first of my ancestors, I wou'd na be fie a cauld-hearted loon as to meddle with a hair o' his hede. I wad be laith to disgrace my famely, by forgetting what is due to humanity.”
“Will you dare disobey my commands, you drawling old driveller?” cried Mrs. Blagden. “I shall tell my lady how you behave yourself; and this house shall no longer harbour people who will not do their duty.”
“Gude troth, an you come to that, 'tis na I that am to blame i'th' matter,” replied old Andrew. “I canna bring mysel to shame, an take up the trade of a cauld-bluded loon, for any Zantippe i'th' lond. An you want a graceless lubber you munna take a Mac-Gregor, —I can tell you that.”
[Page 119]
“O! you saucy mountaineer! you oatmeal vagabond!” exclaimed Mrs. Blagden. “Go back to your land of thistles, you impudent varlet you!”
“Gang your ways, for a crabbed auld cat-a-murrain!” cried the indignant Andrew. “Why you munna think to flout a North Breton; and yet haud your hede as high as your betters. By my sol, an I'd as soon lead the de'il a daunce as far as John o' Groats, as fallow the whemsies of sic an auld beadlamite! Gude troth, I'll e'en jog bock to the Highlands,—and the de'il tack the whole pack o'ye all together: for sic a set never turned the hede of a Scot since the gude days o' Saint Andrew!”
“You'll give me a good character, I warrant you!” cried Mrs. Blagden.
“I canna gi you any thing you're mair in want of: and e'faith I winna stint you o'that,” replied Andrew.
[Page 120]
“Can I speak with Miss Hanbury?” said I.
“In gude faith an you can, if you han'na lost the use o' your tongue,” answered Andrew. “Mistress Isabelle is na si cauld-hearted as this auld scareamouch, saving your presence. I should be laith to turn my bock upon a weelspaken lassie; though I would gang as fare as the Anteepodes to get quit o' sic an auld hagard!—But I winna disgrace my speech;—for it is na for the honour o' my famely to throw dirt with a cheeld o'th' deevil!”
“Can I see Miss Hanbury?” cried I, somewhat impatiently.
“That depends o'the gudeness o'your sight, mon,” replied Andrew: “In troth, an you winna set your eyn on sic a bonie lassie for many a long day, unless you tack a journey to the Highlands.”
[Page 121]
I now wrote my name on a scrap of paper, and delivered it to the honest-hearted Andrew, who instantly quitted the parlour, and left me with Mrs. Blagden.
Again a volley of invective flowed from the never-tiring tongue of my ancient assailant; and the philosophic scorn from which I determined not to deviate, rather increased than suppressed the torrent of her resentment. Seated opposite to my furious and inexorable enemy, I fixed my gaze upon her without uttering a syllable, while with rage nearly approaching to frenzy, she renewed the wordy combat, and exclaimed, as her cheek grew pale and her eyes seemed to slash the fires of indignation, “You audacious fellow you—how dare you set foot within my lady's doors? But this house will soon have a master, thank my stars! one that will not suffer either I or my lady to be insulted and put upon by
[Page 122]
any beggar's brat in the universe. You are just like your mother—she was as impudent as a highwayman's horse, and as ugly too—and when your father preferred her to me, and married a beggarly dependant of my old lady's, all the world cried Shame! so they did— for there was not a better looking woman within a hundred miles of Glenowen than I was, and that the whole universe can testify.—But the chaplain, forsooth, looked over my head, when other folks came to take place of their betters—and all the world said that he deserved to have his gown stripped off his shoulders for his pains, an impudent, ungrateful vagabond!”
“Rail on,” said I; “the dead cannot hear, and the living despise thy malice.”
“Despise!” vociferated Mrs. Blagden — “Despise yourself, or mend your manners. My nephew Edward is your
[Page 123]
master, I can promise you—He has a handsome, genteel, noble presence, like a prince—and ten good thousand pounds in his pocket, my honest savings. Shew me your rent-roll, Mister Mumper; tell me where your fortune is to come from; you shan't have a pin's point of my lady's property. I would out with all I know, if it ruined her and myself into the bargain, rather than see you master of a stick belonging to Glenowen.”
“Thank you, amiable lady!” said I, rising and making a low bow.—She continued—
“My lady minds nobody but me.— I can make her do any thing; and before I am a month older she shall marry my nephew Edward Blagden, or I am not living. You may take your leave of the family—your triumph is nearly expired—you may look for new friends to make fools of; Mr. Hanbury has
[Page 124]
done with you—I took care to settle that business.
Miss Hanbury's suspicions concerning my letters were confirmed by this unguarded confession of Mrs. Blagden's, and I could not refrain from exclaiming, “Infamous harpy!” At this moment Andrew returned.
“Gude troth, lad,” said he with a sorrowful countenance, “the lassie winna gi ye audience; she canna think o' hauding converse wi a person that is na friend o' my lady's. But she bade me tell you that she has na ill blude towards you, and that she wishes you mickle good wherever you wander. I'faith, an I were i'the Highlands you should na want for a hame to put your hede in, though this auld harradan has given you such a deevil of a dressing. Oh! an you cou'd haundle the bagpipes, like some braw lairds that I ken o'the other side the Tweed, you need na be dangling after this lassie and t'other; au the world wou'd
[Page 125]
follow ye, and auld Andrew into the bargain.”
“Will you inform Miss Hanbury that I bring intelligence from Sir Sidney Aubrey?” said I.
“Gude faith will I; an I warrant she winna haud out much longer,” replied old Andrew. “I should be laith to make her angry wi me; but since you come fra Sir Sidney, I'll e'en venture. An now I cau it to mind, I think it was you, lad, that brought the lassie safe hame this morning.”
“Brought the lady safe home this morning!” repeated Mrs. Blagden, with wide-stretched eyes of wonder and suspicion. “Pretty doings! out all night nobody knows where, and brought home at seven in the morning by nobody knows whom. Fine conduct, truly! But my lady shall know it—all the world shall know it; and that canting, preaching, sneering vagabond, Walter Hanbury,
[Page 126]
shall hear what a prudent sister he has got—and Sir Sidney shall be told what a fine friend he has chosen to keep company with;—and you, old Mister Pimp, you sat up to open the door, forsooth!”
“Maister Pemp! Gad's blude, you faucy auld deevil you.—The murrain tak your assurance. If there is a pemp i'the family, 'tis na Andrew Mac-Gregor. Look to your aine beggar's bairne, and do na cau names, left you bring an auld hoose about your ears,” cried the honest Scot, while his face became scarlet with the indignation of insulted honour.
“I know nothing about beggars and barns,” replied Mrs. Blagden.
“Nane so deef as those that winna hear!” added Andrew: “but sin you tak upon you to caw names, and to affront the honour o'my famely, I shanna put up wi your impudence any longer; the de'il a bit do I care for the whole
[Page 127]
clan of you, though you were as auncient as the flude. An sin you make me speak, I'll tell au I ken o'the matter.”
“Scandalize my lady if you dare, you faucy varlet,” cried Mrs. Blagden.
Andrew continued—
“Wha let the lad wi the de'il's name into the hoose, when au the famely were sleeping, Mestress Jeezebel? Wha promised to make a laird o' a loon, that is na fit to clean the shoes of a Mac-Gregor? And wha said that Sir Sidney was na maire my lady's son than a was his majesty's?”
“O you villain! you scurrilous old mischief-maker! I never uttered such a word,” exclaimed Mrs. Blagden.
“By my sol, but you did; an you told your cousin-jarman, Maister Edward, the same story. You canna stop my tongue, sin you have attacked my honour, and sin you tak upon you to govern the famely; I winna stint you of gude
[Page 128]
counsel; it costs me naithing, an your kindly welcome.”
Andrew now quitted the room once more, to convey my message, and I waited impatiently for Isabella's answer. He returned, and brought me word that Miss Hanbury would see me in half an hour.
I was ushered into the drawing-room. Pens, ink, and paper lay on the table, and to beguile the tedious moments, I scribbled the following little
MADRIGAL.
Oh! sad and watchful waits thy lover,
   Whose fate depends upon a smile,
Who counts the weary minutes over,
   And chides his flutt'ring heart the while.
Who, as the zephyrs, softly blowing,
   From drooping flow'rets shake the dew,
While down his cheek the tear is flowing,
   Sweet rose of beauty! sights for you.
[Page 129]
Oh! proud and madd'ning is the pleasure,
   When to my eyes thy form appears;
All drest in Nature's winning treasure
   Of blushing hopes and graceful fears.
And while our bosoms wildly beating,
   A thousand nameless raptures prove;
Our eyes in speechless transport meeting,
   Shall love to gaze, and gaze to love!
Then, Rose of beauty, haste and cheer me,
   With lips like rubies come, and smile;
Ah! trust my faith, and do not fear me,
   I love too fondly to beguile!
The false and cunning may allure thee,
   And win thee only to betray;
I would not, lady, so secure thee,
   Nor wear thy favours for a day.
Then come and bless me, Nature's treasure!
   Oh! come, and bid my sorrows fly;
Instruct my heart to throb with pleasure,
   Or bid me cease to hope, and die!
And, Rose of beauty, since thy lover
   For thee a thousand lives would give,
One grateful thought at least discover,
   One tender sigh to bid him live !
[Page 130]
CHAP. LXXIX. As I finished the last stanza, Isabella entered the room. There was a cast of tender melancholy in her countenance that touched my heart; her eyes were still humid with tears, and every feature bore evident signs of more than ordinary sorrow. “Walsingham,” said she, with a mild and impressive tone, “you will be surprised when I inform you of the change which is about to take place in Lady Aubrey's family:— your aunt, in a few days, will be the wife of Edward Blagden. By the artifice of your ancient enemy, Sir Sidney is estranged from the bosom of his mother, and the long-buried mystery of his birth must at last be unravelled.”
“You awaken my curiosity;—for Heaven's sake be explicit,” said I.
[Page 131]
“Alas, Walsingham! I dare not,” replied Isabella. “I am sworn to secrecy; my aching heart throbs while I recollect the awful vow which I can never break: but that detested fiend, Mrs. Blagden, will shortly elucidate the whole business. Jealous of Lady Aubrey's kindness to me, and anxious to promote her nephew's interest, by a marriage with her too credulous mistress, the secret, which has been held inviolate since the birth of Sir Sidney, cannot fail to transpire. Poor Sidney!— the most amiable, the most generous of mortals.”
She burst into an agony of tears, and for several minutes was incapable of speaking.
“Who is Sir Sidney?—Is he not the child of Lady Aubrey? the heir of Sir Edward?” said I.
“The ill-fated Sidney is the child of Lady Aubrey,” replied Miss Hanbury.
[Page 132]
“But, with the prospect of humiliation which now presents itself, it would have been better he had never known that title; his days have been a scene of sorrow, and, I fear, his last sad hour will close in anguish.”
Again she wept abundantly.
“Was not Sir Edward the father of Sir Sidney?” inquired I earnestly.
“He was; and had he lived, your cousin had been happy.”
“You distract me with a thousand doubts and apprehensions,” said I. “Why should Lady Aubrey's marriage confirm my cousin's misery? Does his every hope of happiness depend on her?”
“Oh no,” replied Miss Hanbury. “There lives another being who will command the fate of Sidney Aubrey.”
“A woman?”
“No—a man; the most deserving, the most enlightened of men,” answered Isabella.
[Page 133]
“Merciful God! you cannot mean your brother?” said I.
Miss Hanbury shook her head, and sighed; but made no answer.
“I have something to communicate respecting Sir Sidney,” said I, “and yet I know not how to tell you— that—”
Isabella rested on my shoulder, and trembled in every limb.
“Have a care,” said she; “my heart is already overpowered with pity. I have too long watched the progress of your cousin's sorrows not to tremble at the idea of their accumulation; he has been the slave of his mother's false ambition. Heaven forbid that I should ever live to say—the victim!—He knows not that a storm is gathering round him which will bend his generous bosom to the grave.”
“I have seen Sir Sidney,” said I.
“When?”
[Page 134]
“This morning—not two hours since.”
Isabella scarcely breathed.
“Happy, happy Sidney! to be so adored,” said I. “All the ills of life, all the vicissitudes of fortune, will pass lightly over a bosom which has such sweet participation.”
“Walsingham!” interrupted Isabella, “yet have a little patience; it is not on me that Sir Sidney's fate depends. Had I the power to sooth his sorrows, I call Heaven to witness how joyfully I would undertake the task. But the affections of the heart must find a poor and feeble solace in the sympathies of friendship, while hope presents no gleam of peace, no dawn of consolation.”
She paused a few moments, and then continued—
“You say that you have seen Sir Sidney?”
[Page 135]
“Not long since—I met him by accident.”
“And why did he not accompany you hither?” said Isabella.
“I did not think to make this visit,” answered I; “but I have something in my possession which belongs to you: indeed so defaced, that I tremble to present it.”
I now took the medallion from my pocket. Miss Hanbury looked at it, and smiled. “I thought I had lost it last night at Lady Amaranth's; the accident is trifling: make no apologies, I conjure you. Where did you find it?”
“You left it at Lady Kencarth's this morning,” said I; “but it was then perfect. You will forgive the fault, when you know that it was committed by Sir Sidney.”
“By accident?” inquired Isabella, half smiling.
[Page 136]
“I cannot even add that extenuation of his folly,” said I, “nor can I account for your indifference on the subject. But you, Isabella, have lived in the unfeeling world long enough to steel your heart against the mild affections: —a lover's gift is easily replaced—by a new lover.”
“Are you frantic?” cried Miss Hanbury hastily. “Will you never hear reason, and act like a thinking mortal?— I conjure you only to have patience till your cousin is of age, and all shall be explained for your repose, Sir Sidney's happiness, and my reputation. As for the last—believe me, Walsingham, when I declare, that you, who ought to be the first to credit my assertion, are the only being upon earth that suspects me of dishonour.”
“The only honest friend who dares tell you what the world's conjectures buz abroad,” said I. “You are the
[Page 137]
reputed mistress of Sir Sidney Aubrey. But romantic fondness can brave the opinions of mankind, and wrapped up in fancied security, set same and reason at defiance. Pardon me, Isabella, if the last words I utter in your presence compose the admonition of a friend; the language of esteem, the unvarnished declaration of truth, growing from affection, and struggling with resentment.”
“Resentment!—Oh Heaven!” cried Isabella, “in what instance have I merited resentment from you—my earliest friend, the associate of my childhood? You, who ought to know my heart, and to judge it with more lenity: I have ever loved you as a brother.”
“Would to God my affection had been of that cold and tranquil nature which might suit a brother's bosom!” said I; “but I was deceived. I thought that the delights of infancy, the growing sympathy of minds, the rich and
[Page 138]
pure congeniality of soul which marked our earliest hours, would ripen into something more than friendship.”
“Then you deceived yourself,” cried Isabella; “your virtues, your attachment charmed my mind, but never touched my heart. I have not deceived you, Walsingham.—I have never entertained a thought beyond the intercourse of friendship; and even at this moment, when I have no wish, no reason to dissemble, I frankly own that my heart is devoted to—”
“Sir Sidney Aubrey?” interrupted I.
“No, not to him, by all my hopes of happiness!” replied Isabella; “it is impossible that I ever should be the wife of your unfortunate cousin; though every moment of my life should be joyfully dedicated to the task of friendship, could such attentions in the smallest degree alleviate his sorrows.”
[Page 139]
At this moment honest Andrew entered the room. “Gude troth, an you must part,” said he; “the auld deevil is caballing with my lady, and storming like a witch o' a windy night. I should be laith to ge the vaxin her way, and see the braw lad turned into the street like a beggar's bairne, to please her deev'lish whamsies;—you had better tak my counsel, and gang your gait quietly.”
“I will go instantly,” said I.
“Indeed, Walsingham, you will act wisely in departing,” cried Isabella;— “the tyranny of Mrs. Blagden beneath this roof is insupportable; there is no outrage which she is not capable of planning—no insult which her malice would not put in practice; but her hour of rapacity draws near to a conclusion; for Lady Aubrey's income, when Sir Sidney comes of age, will be diminished; —the sum of six thousand pounds, annually allowed for his board and education,
[Page 140]
will from that moment cease to be paid; and his fate or fortune will then excite little interest in either Mrs. Blagden's mind, or that of his unfeeling mother.”
“He will be placed by fortune above their machinations,” said I.
Isabella shook her head, and faintly articulated “I fear he will be wretched!”
We now heard Mrs. Blagden's voice —Andrew renewed his intreaties that I would be gone—and, to avoid altercation, I consented.
“You shall see or hear from me again very soon,” said Isabella. As I quitted the drawing-room she added— “Remember poor Sidney! endeavour to think kindly of him, to respect his virtues, and to pity his misfortunes!”
I had a thousand things to say—a thousand questions to ask; but the clamorous fury approached—Andrew trembled,
[Page 141]
and Isabella conjured me to be gone; therefore, after a short struggle betwixt prudence and inclination, I kissed her hand, and departed.
CHAP. LXXX. I returned to Hanover-square, where I found a large party assembled to dinner; among others it was again my misfortune to meet the Duke of Heartwing. —Our greeting was mutually cold and ceremonious; his Grace's pride and my contempt seemed destined to hold a perpetual contest; he determined to demand as I to deny that homage, which too often debases human nature. Lord Kencarth was in high spirits, and repeatedly announced to his guests that the
[Page 142]
party was made for the purpose of ‘seasoning his tutor.’
I observed the Duke frequently looking at me with an eye of suspicion, which I as regularly encountered with the firm gaze of conscious rectitude. As soon as the dessert was placed on the table, with a profusion of wines that would have tempted the palate of a Mussulman, the Duke, with a supercilious tone, drank to the improvement of my pupil's morality.
Doctor Pimpernel, who was also of the party, seconded the toast with the promptitude of adulation—“Your Grace is a most profound observer of human nature!” cried the Doctor, filling his glass; “and with your experience, what cannot be accomplished?”
“Queer my nobility, if I don't beat dukey out and out!” said Lord Kencarth; “what can he do?—when he was educated, nobody knew any thing that was worth learning. Dish my sconce, if I
[Page 143]
don't match all the old school at any game they will mention, and my tutor shall be judge.”
“Is your tutor competent to the task?” interrupted his Grace.
“Competent! dash my jasey, he is equal to any thing,” replied his lordship: “why he shall make love with your Grace, or talk Latin with the Doctor, for five hundred, play or pay, quiz my learning if he shan't.”
The Doctor hemmed and rubbed his forehead; the Duke smiled contemptuously.
“How can we bring your tutor's superiority to the proof?” said his Grace.
“O! nothing more easy,” replied my pupil— “I'll bet you a thousand that he is married before your Grace.”
“I shall not make the trial,” said I.
“Will your lordship take the bet yourself?” cried the Duke. “Nay, I'll add four times the sum, and allow you ten days to make the experiment.”
[Page 144]
The Doctor nodded significantly; his Grace, encouraged by the signal, continued—
“What! my Lord! will you suffer your inexhaustible store of new knowledge to be challenged and surpassed by one of the old school?”
Lord Kencarth was evidently piqued by the taunting manner in which his Grace addressed him.—“Dish my sconce,” said he, “if I have not a great mind to make the bet—but the sum is too trifling—it will not pay the parson and buy my wife's court gown; dash my jasey, make it ten thousand guineas, and I'll take it.”
“Done, for ten thousand,” said the Duke, “and the period allowed to decide the bet just ten days.”
My pupil agreed to the terms, and the bottle went round, as a new flow of animation seemed to warm every
[Page 145]
bosom, except mine, which was almost petrified by astonishment.
“I'll bet you another thousand,” cried Doctor Pimpernel, addressing my pupil, “that his Grace wins your money.”
“I take it,” said Lord Kencarth; “for dish my nobility, but I have a nice girl in my eye, who will have no objection to wear the ermine,—a little rustic with all the graces of a court; and queer my caxon, if she won't have me, I'll marry my old woman, and do the thing in style.”
“Well,” cried the Doctor, “this will be a busy week: with his Grace's person and transcendent perfections of mind, he cannot fail to win the wager: for that woman must be senseless indeed, who had not taste to idolize the one and to pay homage to the other.”
The whole circle roared with laughter —his Grace looked disconcerted—the Doctor hemmed.
[Page 146]
Lord Kencarth interrupted the clamorous mirth with “Quiz me, but Pimpernel's a deep one, for he has said the very same thing to me at least an hundred times.”
“His Grace's pretensions require no comment!” continued the Doctor; “the form of Hercules! the front of Jove himself! an eye—”
Again the table roared.
“Damme!” cried the Duke, “I see nothing to laugh at. Pray, Sir,” addressing me, “can you explain the cause of this boisterous merriment?”
“The cause is evident, my Lord Duke,” said I.
“Curse me, if I know the subject of their mirth,” continued his Grace.
“I always believed as much,” said I, gravely.
The bottle went round till near eleven o'clock, when coffee was ordered, and the duke proposed adjourning to a ball at the Duchess of Riversford's. The carriages
[Page 147]
were at the door, and we departed. I would have excused myself, by informing Lord Kencarth that the Duchess and I were not even upon speaking terms.
“Pshaw! don't mind that,” cried my pupil; “we never go to people's houses because we like them; you need not speak to the Duchess; her doors are open to every body, and we go thither to be amused. Who cares for the hostess?— Dish my jasey, but you must do the right thing, however your inclinations may lead to the contrary.”
Still I endeavoured to excuse myself, and still my pupil would take no denial.
“You cannot refuse,” said he;— “you'll find all sorts of sports going forward; you will not want for amusement, my hearty. Besides, I shall want you particularly this evening—I have something important to do, and you must assist me.—So, dish my nobility, tutor, but you must go.”
[Page 148]
Again I positively refused to accompany his lordship—he continued—
“All the world will be there; and the Duchess informed me this morning, that she had invited the Welsh family of the Aubreys. I am told that the visitor is looking for her match—who knows, my hearty, but I may get her to have me, and so dish the old duke for ten thousand without farther trouble.”
The idea in an instant vanquished all my scruples, and, without further hesitation, I accompanied my pupil to the Duchess of Riversford's.
[Page 149]
CHAP. LXXXI. I found all my old fashionable friends, with a considerable augmentation of new faces. Lady Aubrey's party was not yet come; and with watchful impatience I waited for her arrival. Doctor Pimpernel evinced his qualification as master of the ceremonies, and every couple seemed satisfied with his judicious arrangement. Though I was never fond of dancing; I could not refuse when challenged by the lively and charming Lady Arabella, who, amidst the gay and splendid throng, was the only person that condescended to recollect me.
We had scarcely gone down one dance, when Lady Aubrey, Isabella, and Sir Sidney entered. My heart throbbed with a variety of sensations, while I anticipated
[Page 150]
events that would probably occur during the evening.—I have seldom found my presentiment erroneous, and therefore considered the impression of that moment as the sure prognostic of what really happened.
Lady Aubrey had been only a few minutes in the room, when my unlucky form met her eyes.—Her countenance betrayed a mixture of astonishment and indignation, which was evident, not only to my partner, but to every person that stood near us. She fixed her stern gaze upon me, and followed me down the dance with persecuting malignity. When I came to the lower end of the room, I observed her in close conversation with Isabella, and distinctly heard her say, “I command you, Miss Hanbury, not to take any notice of the abandoned profligate —He has sufficiently disgraced his family and connections already.”
[Page 151]
I smiled.—Miss Hanbury was overwhelmed with confusion.—Sir Sidney sat on a sofa, so sorrowfully pensive, that he seemed alone in the busy circle, and wholly inattentive to the surrounding scene of animation.
Isabella had not been long in the room when she attracted the notice of the Duke of Heartwing. His attention was instantly fixed, and they entered into conversation, at once easy and familiar. The Duchess encouraged the gallantry of his Grace; and Isabella did not seem displeased with the marked admiration which her personal graces evidently excited. I watched Sir Sidney's countenance; —it betrayed not the smallest emotion;—there was no symptom of fear; no flush of jealous inquietude. All the coquetry of Isabella, all the assiduity of the Duke, passed before his eyes unnoticed, and I was at a loss to comprehend the meaning of his apathy.
[Page 152]
Lady Arabella proposed resting, and I was not sorry to embrace an opportunity of conversing with my pupil, who had several times during the dance made signals of impatience to speak with me.
As soon as I could with propriety leave Lady Arabella, I retired to a small card-room with Lord Kencarth, who, taking me by the arm, desired, without ceremony, that I would convey a message from him to Isabella.— “Dish my nobility, tutor,” said he, “if I won't have her! She is quite the thing, my hearty, and seems upon the look-out for a husband: queer me, if I don't hate the idea of a long courtship; so do you go and tell her, that, dash my wig if I don't marry her to-morrow morning.”
“Marry Miss Hanbury!” said I, with astonishment, which I could not conceal.
“Why not?” cried his lordship; “she's a nice girl, and I shall get the
[Page 153]
Duke's ten thousand by the bargain. Queer my sconce, but I must win my bet at all events, and I think I cannot act wiser than to take the little Welsh girl off the hands of her dragon, Lady Aubrey: —so, tutor, do you go and tell her so, while I wait here for her answer, and don't stay prosing about it, lest I should alter my mind.”
“The proposal would come with more propriety from yourself,” said I; “making love by proxy is so perfectly absurd, that I should be the butt of eternal ridicule. You must plead your own cause, if you hope to succeed.”
“Dash me, but I'm not up to it,” replied my pupil. “I never yet had courage to talk about a parson. I can't make love—quiz me if I can—and for that reason I have always sported an old girl of fashion;—they save one the trouble, you know. But this is losing time,” continued his lordship; “there's Heartwing
[Page 154]
close at her elbow;—he'll nab the little one if I don't keep a good lookout; —and so chouse me out of a wise and ten thousand into the bargain.”
“Will you marry a woman to whom you are entirely a stranger?” said I.
“Why not?” cried my pupil. “Dish my jasey if it is not the only way. I sha'n't know her bad qualities, and her good ones will the more surprise me. Besides, I am seldom twelve hours in the same mind;—and she that takes me, must catch me when she can, queer my nobility:—I'm not one of your danglers; —I can't wait for a girl till she is old enough to be a grandmother, and then make her a lady to prove myself a fool. So take my message, and let's have no prosing about it.”
At this instant the Duke of Heartwing entered the card-room. There was a smile of triumph on his countenance, that bespoke a mind perfectly satisfied
[Page 155]
with its prospects of success:— “How do you feel about your bet?” said his Grace, addressing my pupil; “will you give five thousand to be off? You had better accept the proposal, for it is the last time I shall make it.”
“Not a guinea, by all that is quizzical: —dish me, but I'd marry the witch of Endor, rather than lose my wager,” replied his lordship.
The Duke smiled.
Lady Aubrey and Miss Hanbury interrupted the conversation, and I went in search of Lady Arabella, happy to escape from the importunities of my eccentric pupil.
I found my pretty partner in close conversation with Sir Sidney Aubrey. On seeing me she quitted her seat, and, with some embarrassment, inquired why I had so ungallantly deserted her. “Indeed,” said she, with an arch smile, which contradicted the impressive mildness
[Page 156]
of her voice, “you are an unpardonable truant. But you philosophers are monstrously savage, and wonderfully apt to desert those who are most fond of your society. Your amiable cousin is not so pedantic;—he has been saying all sorts of civil things to me; and if you do not take care, he will become a great favourite, I assure you.”
“My cousin is a universal lover,” said I. “A lady's favours are little valued by one of so changeable a nature.”
“I deny the charge,” cried Sir Sidney. “Heaven knows, that my heart is incapable of changing.”
“I told you so,” interrupted Lady Arabella, “and it was vastly presumptuous in you to dispute my opinion. Did you not confess to me that you were in love to distraction?” continued her ladyship, addressing my cousin.
[Page 157]
“I plead guilty,” replied Sir Sidney.
Lady Arabella's eyes sparkled with conscious victory:— “Well,” said she, giving Sir Sidney's arm a gentle tap with her fan; “you are a charming creature, in spite of all your melancholy humours; and if I were not an admirer of a certain marble-hearted pedant, that shall be nameless, I should like vastly to fall in love with you.”
My cousin bowed; and I scarcely knew how to interpret her declaration.
Lady Arabella again rallied me on my gravity of manners:— “I protest, you are perfectly savage!” cried she; “you will destroy the charming vivacity of your pupil, if you set him so freezing an example; and in another winter, he will be fit for nothing but to study Greek, and give lectures on philosophy. A few such ice-plants would chill the whole parterre of fashionable life; and not a
[Page 158]
flower would be seen to lift its head, from the venerable Amaranth, to the ‘Rose of beauty’—that somebody has so tunefully celebrated!;For, there are moments, when the most frigid bosoms confess a glow of animation;the sun is not concealed from the coldest regions eternally.”
“I protest I do not comprehend you,” said I.
“Well! you are the greatest savage I ever met with!” replied Lady Arabella; “and I should add, the greatest hypocrite, but that poets are allowed to deal in fiction. The gravity of selfpossession, and the austerity of wisdom, will, nevertheless, give way to softer sensations, when eyes love to gaze, and gaze to love!”
I now found that the verses which I had left at Lady Aubrey's had been given by Isabella to Sir Sidney; and presented, by him, to Lady Arabella.
[Page 159]
With an assumed frown, and a tone of the most ridiculous solemnity; she opened the paper, and began aloud to read the stanzas. I conjured her to desist. My intreaties only made her more determined to torment me, and several persons collecting round her, I was at a loss how to act, Among others, Lord Kencarth hastened towards us:—the verses were read, and every line criticised with merciless ridicule. Lady Arabella, whose vivacity resisted all my earnest solicitations to forbear, after concluding the last stanza, presented the paper to Isabella:‘Permit me, divine enchantress!’ said she, with a tone and gesture irresistibly comical, ‘permit me to lay at your feet the romantic effusions of a rustic lover; whose pure and ardent flame mocks all the heroes of old, that embellish the annals of adventurous chivalry!’
[Page 160]
Isabella blushed:—my pupil stared:— Sir Sidney looked grave;—and the whole circle enjoyed my confusion.
“Queer me, tutor, but I have found you out!” cried Lord Kencarth:— “you are taken in, my deep one;— dished, by all that is quizzical! The game is against you; and since you meant to play booty, dash my nobility but I'll be even with you! So hark'ye, Miss, let you and I have a little conversation to-morrow morning: I have asked Lady Aubrey's leave, and the thing will soon be settled.”
Isabella darted from the circle, and my pupil followed.
Lady Arabella, taking my arm, and leading me to the farthest end of the room, after laughing heartily, inquired where I had learned to make love so delightfully:— “Yet,” said she, “though you treated me so savagely, I am monstrously
[Page 161]
sorry that I have exposed you to such ridicule. I have seen Miss Hanbury all the evening coquetting with Lord Kencarth; and I really thought it scandalous to desert such a lover for such a substitute. Forgive my raillery, I conjure you,” continued Lady Arabella, at the same time assuming a serious and tender tone,— “and believe, that nothing but my regard for you should have induced me to act so absurdly.”
I bowed, but was too much vexed to make any answer.
After hesitating a few moments, during which the expression of her countenance entirely changed, she continued— “Say that you are not much chagrined by my nonsensical levity. Indeed, Mr. Ainsforth, it would give me more pain than I dare acknowledge to suppose, even for a moment, that any folly of mine could distress your feelings. The verses were given to me by Sir Sidney
[Page 162]
Aubrey as specimens of your poetical talents, and while I admired the subject of your adoration—forgive me if I confess—she was also an object of my envy.”
“Can envy, the most poisonous of weeds, thrive in so gentle and so kind a bosom?” said I.
“What other name can I give to feelings so ridiculous?” said Lady Arabella. “It ought not to interest me— it ought not to give me pain.”
Again she hesitated.
“What ought not to interest you?” said I.
“Your attention to Miss Hanbury.”
“I have known her from an infant; I love her as I should love a sister,” said I.
“Ah! how surely does your pen contradict your assertion,” interrupted Lady Arabella.
I found that the tone of voice, and levity of manners, which, till that moment, seemed to characterise her conversation,
[Page 163]
were merely assumed as the adopted nonsense of fashionable life, and that the lovely Lady Arabella, who had hitherto appeared to be the most affected of high-bred triflers, was, in reality, a reasonable being.”
Sir Sidney now joined us. “What an interesting tête-a-tête!” cried he, endeavouring to force a smile, which the fixed solemnity of his countenance sternly opposed. “Mr. Ainsforth is a practised deceiver,” continued he,“and I counsel you not to believe him.”
Lady Arabella scarcely knew how to answer; but with some difficulty, and a deep sigh, replied— “You are all “deceivers; yet I think Mr. Ainsforth deserves confidence as much as any of you.”
“There never was a more decided hypocrite,” continued my cousin. “Even at the moment that he hopes to impose on your credulity, his vagrant heart is sighing for Miss Hanbury.”
[Page 164]
“Can you not deny the charge?” said Lady Arabella.
I made no reply.
“You are silent:—well, I can only admire your choice, and thank Sir Sidney for his caution,” continued her ladyship.
Lady Aubrey now requested my cousin to find Isabella, and to inform her that she was going. He departed, leaving me with Lady Arabella. There was a something bewitchingly animated in her manner and conversation—something so impressive, whether grave or gay, that I had not power to leave her. Sir Sidney conducted his mother to her carriage: Lord Kencarth proposed returning home; and I took leave of Lady Arabella, after obtaining her permission to renew my visit on the following morning.
[Page 165]
CHAP. LXXXII. I passed the remainder of the night in rumination. The childish levity of Isabella's conduct, the evident indifference of Sir Sidney on the subject, and Lady Arabella's impressive conversation, by turns occupied my thoughts. My interview with Miss Hanbury, on the preceding day at Lady Aubrey's, convinced me that her attachment to my cousin was at an end, and that her aversion to me was insuperable. With this conviction strongly, deeply engraved upon my mind, Lady Arabella's attentions could not be remembered without an emotion of gratitude—a sentiment of esteem. She was young, lovely, amiable, and ingenuous. I had been persecuted by fortune, neglected by Isabella. Pride began to gain an ascendancy
[Page 166]
over attachment, and I resolved at least to cultivate Lady Arabella's esteem, and to try, as my last resource, whether jealousy would not awaken the latent sparks of that affection, which once warmed the bosom of my ungrateful idol.
I passed the next day chiefly in Lady Arabella's society. In the morning we strolled to Kensington gardens, and in the evening I attended her to the opera. Every moment augmented my admiration, while her attentions convinced me that the glow of esteem was reciprocal. Isabella's determined coldness had wearied my mind into disgust, and I began to consider my attachment as a proof of obstinate perseverance, no less absurd than hopeless.
A week passed, during which I saw but little of my pupil, and still less of the Aubrey family. My constant attentions to Lady Arabella occupied my
[Page 167]
mind entirely: I was her companion at all public places, and, consequently, the object of universal envy. My vanity was flattered; my revenge, in a great measure, gratified. Still, Rosanna, my heart partook of no share in the triumph, and if a change could decidedly take place, I hoped for repose and indifference, rather than for any glowing sensation of the heart which could boast the smallest affinity to love.
The period now rapidly advanced which was to decide Lord Kencarth's wager with the Duke of Heartwing. On the eighth day, I observed my pupil more than commonly agitated. There was a strange and unaccountable reserve in his manner and conversation that excited my curiosity. I inquired how he felt his mind respecting the Duke's approaching triumph?—He made no answer, but looked more wretched than a culprit who awaited the hour of execution.
[Page 168]
After passing some time in sullen silence, he addressed me— “Dash me, Ainsforth, but I am sorry to be the messenger of bad news: yet the truth must come out; and therefore the sooner you know it the better. Lady Aubrey has settled the business, and I mean to marry Isabella to-morrow morning.”
“Impossible!” said I, almost petrified with astonishment.
“Dish my nobility, but 'tis true,” cried my pupil. “The Dowager spoke a good word:—the neat-one was willing; and Sir Sidney has settled the whole business to the satisfaction of all parties. Now, tutor, though the ring is bought, and the parson bespoke, if you like the girl, dash my jasey, if I won't be off after all; for now it comes to a pinch, queer my caxon, if I have the heart to do a dishonourable thing, or to rob any man of happiness, for the
[Page 169]
enhancement of my own. Speak the word, and quiz me, but I'll do the thing handsomely.”
This intelligence for a moment made my fortitude stagger; but the indifference of Isabella would not even then have alienated my affections, had not Lord Kencarth's generosity decided my resotion. “Take her,” said I; “she does not deserve to influence so generous a mind.”
“I will have her, but upon one condition,” cried my pupil; “which is, that you will marry Lady Arabella. She is a nice girl, dish my sconce; and if you don't take her for better or for worse, quiz me, but I'll lose my wager.”
“You cannot answer for the caprices of a woman,” said I; “a young, a lovely, an ambitious woman. Lady Arabella is amiable; but she looks forward to a prouder alliance.”
[Page 170]
“The greater the danger, the more the honour,” replied my pupil. “Quiz me, but the girl is ready to leap into your arms; and you are such a flat that some deeper one will oust you while you are prosing about it. Since you give up a wife for me, dash my jasey, but I am bound to find a substitute.”
While we were conversing on the subject, Doctor Pimpernel's name was announced. He entered the room with an air of triumph, and with insulting solemnity informed us that the Duke was married.
“Married!” exclaimed I, looking at my pupil, who loudly vociferated— “Then dash my wig, but I have had a lucky escape; for, queer my nobility, if, of the two, I hadn't rather been hanged than married. D—me, Ainsforth, you may now take your choice; the little Welch coquette, or Lady Arabella.”
[Page 171]
“Lady Arabella!” cried the Doctor.
“Aye, my hearty!—Tutor is up to your gossip; he knows how to arrange business, as well as the best match-maker among you. But, quiz my caxon, who has the Duke married?”
“That remains a secret for the present,” replied Doctor Pimpernel.
“Come, no underhand work, master doctor,” cried my pupil; “I am not to be tricked out of ten thousand by a sham. I'll see the bride; dash my wig, but I'll see the parson too:—so come along, tutor—let's be off. The carriage is at the door, and we'll go row the deep-ones. Dish me, but I'm in luck.”
“What! to have lost ten thousand guineas?” said I.
“O! queer my caxon, any thing but a wife!” replied his lordship, darting out of the room in high spirits.
[Page 172]
We stepped into the carriage, and the coachman was ordered to drive with all possible expedition to the Duke of Heartwing's.
CHAP. LXXXIII. on our arrival at the door,Lord Kencarth sent in his name, with his request to see the Duke immediately. We were ufhered into the saloon, where we found his Grace in close conversation with Doctor Pimpernel, who, notwithstanding our speed, had reached the Duke's before us. My pupil desired to know whether the intelligence conveyed to him by the Doctor was true: and requested that his Grace would give him such incontestible proofs of his marriage as
[Page 173]
should authorize the payment of the sum lost.
“I pledge you my word of honour,” said Doctor Pimpernel, “that I had the supreme felicity of giving the divine creature away! and more transcendent beauty, heightened by superlative purity of mind and reputation, never embellished the honours of a ducal coronet! I had the pleasure of presenting his Grace to the angelic mortal! and never since the union of Venus and Adonis, did so illustrious a pair offer up their vows at the hymeneal altar!”
“This may all be very true, Doctor,” said Lord Kencarth; “but, queer my nobility, if I don't see the Duchess, and the parson, the clerk, the licence, and the whole paraphernalia of the business. I'm not to be done over.”
The clergyman who had performed the ceremony was now ushered in. My
[Page 174]
pupil began to think, that the affair was beyond a jest. “Well,” said he sighing, “now let us see the lady.”
“More loveliness and virtue never graced the exalted sphere of nobility!” cried Doctor Pimpernel. “I have long known the divine creature! and it gives me infinite pleasure to see, that superior rank will be the reward of superior virtue! Her Grace will take the lead of all the fashionables!—she will outshine the very fun!—she will kill the envious with the brilliancy of her attractions, and become the honour of her illustrious consort! The Duke has only known her Grace three days—but he is enchanted! I have long seen and admired her. She is nobly born, and highly educated;— but she wanted fortune to draw her into notice. She was a rich gem in a mine; a pearl in the vast ocean; a star in a dark hemisphere!—Well!”
[Page 175]
“Dish my sconce! let us see her,” interrupted my pupil somewhat impatiently.
The Duke's countenance was the index of a mind exhilarated by success:— “You will see, my Lord,” said he, with a triumphant smile, “you will be convinced, that the ‘Old School’ is no bad thing, and that a man on the wrong side sixty may aspire to a beautiful woman, when twenty-one cannot make a conquest. I have to thank your lordship's impetuosity, and my friend Pimpernel's discernment, for one of the most celestial stars that ever moved on the amorous horizon!—and I flatter myself that the Duchess of Heartwing will add a wreath to my coronet, which will outblaze all the gems that have been placed there by my long train of ancestors.”
“Most likely,” said I; “but can we not see this brilliant constellation?”
[Page 176]
“Aye, dish my wig, let us have a peep, if only to console me for the loss of my ten thousand,” cried my pupil.
“Well!” said Doctor Pimpernel, “I will endeavour to persuade her Grace: she is all exquisite sensibility;— timid as Daphne—yet haughty as the wife of Jove! You must submit to see her only for a moment; this sudden marriage has overwhelmed the delicacy of her feelings;—but the felicity of making the Duke a present of ten thousand guineas, to compensate for her want of fortune, vanquished her scruples, and rendered his Grace the happiest of mortals!”
The Doctor quitted the saloon:—the Duke hummed an opera air as he threw himself on a sofa, and we waited with the utmost impatience for her Grace's arrival.
In a few minutes she entered.—Her face was veiled, but her form was indeed
[Page 177]
beautiful. She wore the dress of a vestal; a robe of thin white satin falling to her feet, and a zone of pearls, presented that morning by the illustrious bridegroom, composed the whole of her paraphernalia. The thickness of her veil prevented our seeing her features; but she held it, with a hand, white as the most polished marble. I approached her; she trembled.
“Are you satisfied?” said the Duke, exultingly.
“With as much as we see, it is impossible to be otherwise,” answered I. “Yet I think my pupil would be still more gratified by a sight of her Grace's features. She will forgive that curiosity which is excited by the beauty of her form, and the purity of her mind will feel no debasement from the gaze of respectful admiration.”
She sighed, but remained motionless as a statue.
[Page 178]
“My Lord Duke, will you request the favour of her Grace to unveil?” said I.
“That proof of condescension will depend entirely upon her own will, replied the Duke. The lovely bride retired towards the door, which opened to a splendid boudoir; her limbs scarcely supported her—she was near falling —when I caught her on my arm,—the veil fell from her face, and my eyes instantly recognized the amiable—but unfortunate —Julie de Beaumont.
I had sufficient command over myself not to betray her. I whispered, “Fear nothing; I rejoice in your good fortune. —She revived. The Duke coldly inquired what ailed her Grace? and Doctor Pimpernel attributed the sudden emotion of her mind to the awkwardness of her situation. She retired. The clergyman and the doctor proved the marriage. The Duke was enchanted
[Page 179]
with his success, and we departed; I to muse in silence on the revolutions of fortune, and my worthy pupil to lament his folly, and the loss of his ten thousand guineas.
CHAP. LXXXIV. On the following morning I found that Lady Aubrey had quitted London, and set out for Glenowen, in order to celebrate her marriage with Edward Blagden. Sir Sidney and Isabella were the companions of her journey; the latter having written a letter to Lord Kencarth, declining the proposal of his hand, and bidding him a decisive farewell.
My pupil was more gratified than offended by Miss Hanbury's refusal;— the caprice of the moment was over; and the inducement to sacrifice his liberty
[Page 180]
existing no longer, he felicitated himself in his escape, and swore never again to make a bet upon so perilous a subject.
I continued my visits to Lady Arabella with undiminished assiduity. Miss Hanbury's trifling coquetry had palsied the ardour of my affection, and I resolved, at least, to punish her for the sickleness of her conduct.
Three weeks had passed in the society of my new idol, when a visit from Doctor Pimpernel once more undermined my prospect of happiness. A private conversation with the Duchess, which lasted some hours, determined her Grace on forbidding my visits. I received my congè with considerable chagrin, and the lovely Lady Arabella the next morning set out for Bath with her mother.
Once more defeated in my hopes of felicity, I opened my heart to my worthy though eccentric pupil. He counselled me to follow Lady Arabella, and
[Page 181]
promised to accompany me in my chivalrous exploit with all the zeal of a brave and trusty 'Squire. The temptation was too powerful to be resisted; and early on the following morning we set out together. Nothing important occurred during our rapid journey. We reached Bath in fifteen hours;—but to our infinite surprise we discovered that the Duchess of Riversford had altered her plan of destination, and proceeded with her daughter to a distant part of the country.
On the evening of our arrival, I determined to visit the patron of my youth, the worthy and liberal Mr. Randolph. My pupil remained at Bath, to be present at a race on which he had a considerable sum depending; while I departed for Bristol to pay the debt so long due from gratitude and friendship.
I found Mr. Randolph in a state of health that menaced his speedy dissolution.
[Page 182]
He received me with open arms: —all that had passed he recalled to memory, though I wished most earnestly to bury the prominent events in eternal oblivion. He lamented that I had endured a temporary captivity on his account; while he attributed the trifling service which I rendered him on the night of my walk from Bristol to Bath, as the cause of his renewed prosperity, and preservation from death, at a moment when reason was almost vanquished by the pressure of misfortune.
Mr. Randolph requested that I would remain with him, at least, some days. “I have many friends, said he, “who unite in reconciling my mind to the will of Heaven, and in smoothing my path to that resting-place, where the vicissitudes of fortune will perplex me no longer. But you are entitled to more than common esteem; you demand from me the affection of a father. In that
[Page 183]
momentous hour, when adversity frowned and every hope forsook me, unknown to you, with no claim to your compassion, but that which my misfortunes gave me, I found in your breast an advocate, from your genuine philanthropy the means of preservation.
I conjured him to think of it no more.
“Not think of it, Walsingham! said he, pressing his hand upon his heart; “while vitality warms this bosom, I shall never cease to remember it. Since my return to Bristol, Fortune has been profuse of her favours, and every plan of emolument has been successful, even beyond my most sanguine wishes. My West India plantations have been prolific; my commercial concerns prosperous; and now I am preparing to quit this busy scene of toil and inquietude, with the conscious gratification, that destiny
[Page 184]
has at last afforded me the means of rendering you happy.”
His language penetrated my heart; for while I viewed his emaciated frame, his hollow and sunk eyes, and heard the feeble voice, struggling with a short and difficult respiration, I anticipated the termination of a life which had done honour to humanity. My affliction was acute and certain;—and my reflections were mournful, as my distress was poignant.
Mr. Randolph observed the gloom which marked my features, and with a faint smile endeavoured to treat the subject lightly. “All the joys of this sublunary state are transient, said he; “and those vexations, even if they amount to sorrows, which alienate the soul from the fascinations of existence, may be valued as possessing a beneficial tendency. I am weary of a toilsome life, and sigh for
[Page 185]
a long holiday of rest. You will well employ the wealth I shall leave behind me.
He stopped abruptly, and took several turns round the room. “But we will change this melancholy topic, continued he, with an assumed gaiety; “for I must not carry a countenance of sorrow to a scene of joy. To-morrow I shall witness the felicity of a friend,—and you shall bear me company.
I bowed assent, but my mind was too deeply interested in Mr. Randolph's fate to enter rapidly on a new train of thinking. The day passed in anxious hopes and fears that wrung my heart. The friend of my youth, the voluntary patron, whose liberality had completed the task so zealously begun by Mr. Hanbury, was hourly sinking to the grave!—Could I witness the desolation of such distinguished virtues, and be tranquil? Yet, Rosanna, however severely I felt the
[Page 186]
sorrow of that moment, it was of little magnitude in comparison with that which I have since suffered.
Early on the following morning we repaired to Clifton, to be present at the marriage of Mr. Randolph's friend. I waited in the carriage while he stopped at the lodgings of the bridegroom. The party had only a few minutes before repaired to the village church, which stood on the summit of the hill, not far distant. The day was brilliantly clear, though it was winter; the bells were ringing as we approached the church-yard, and every object seemed to assume the lively garb of rustic celebration. We entered the aisle; the ceremony was just begun; the bride, though not in the rich bloom of juvenile attractions, was uncommonly handsome; and the happy partner of her choice, was my old acquaintance Mr. M'Arthur.
[Page 187]
But how, Rosanna, shall I delineate, how describe the awful and soul-agonizing scene, which followed rapidly on the hour of anticipated joy!—Oh, Heaven! while my hand traces the dreadful events of that momentous period, my heart shudders, and my brain shrinks like the sensitive herb!—would to God it were withered for ever!
Near the bride, like the pale spectre of a departed angel, robed in a vest of white cambric, and with a countenance serenely pensive, stood Amelia Woodford. She was deeply intent on the awful ceremony then performing; and, as we stole gently along the aisle, did not observe us. My heart throbbed with a new torrent of circulation. I approached the group; Amelia turned her eyes towards me; and in a moment sunk on the marble steps before the altar.
Colonel Aubrey and Mrs. Woodford knelt and supported her. The ceremony
[Page 188]
was interrupted, and my situation was undescribable. Mrs. Woodford intreated me to depart:—Mr. Randolph's consternation was evident; and Colonel Aubrey's countenance evinced such sensations of distress as pierced every fibre in my bosom. My feet seemed rooted to the pavement:—I scarcely knew where I was, while every thing around me looked horribly obscure.
Mr. Randolph shook my arm:— “Walsingham, said he, “whatever this interruption may threaten, it is but too evident that you are the cause of it. I conjure you to quit the scene.
Colonel Aubrey conveyed Amelia into the vestry, and I permitted Mr. Randolph to guide my steps back to Mr. M'Arthur's lodgings.
I could not rest in a state of uncertainty, but inquiring where Mrs. Woodford resided, hastened thither as swiftly as my feet would bear me. Her house was at
[Page 189]
some distance, near the Hot-wells. I rushed into the parlour, and demanded of the servant whether any intelligence had arrived respecting Miss Woodford. This question brought on a farther elucidation, and I was informed that Amelia had been just fourteen days the wife of Colonel Aubrey; that on the following week they purposed sailing for Gibraltar; —and that the bride of my friend Mr. M'Arthur, was Lady Kencarth, the amiable mother of my eccentric pupil.
I had scarcely received this intelligence, when a carriage stopped at the door. I flew to meet it;—but, Oh God! what an object did my startled eyes encounter! The noble, the benignant, the generous Aubrey, bearing in his trembling arms the lifeless form of his adored Amelia! My brain seemed to shudder;—every limb stiffened with horror!—I gazed wildly round me. The stupendous rocks which hung over
[Page 190]
the slow winding Avon seemed to blacken while I beheld them. I fancied that my presence darkened the scene of wonders; —I was wild and frantic.
Colonel Aubrey conveyed the cold remains of all that he loved in this world of troubles to a small parlour, where he gently reclined them on a sofa;—and falling on his knees, with his hands clasped in the agony of sorrow, and his eyes fixed in speechless fondness, remained motionless as a statue,—gazing on the placid countenance of that celestial shadow, whose meek and injured spirit had flown to happier regions.
Every aid was ineffectually administered to re-animate the fountain of exhausted vitality: but the source was petrified! —the once warmly throbbing bosom was frozen by the fixed shaft of death! That lip, from which truth and harmony had stolen, even to the hearts of all who heard her, was sealed in icy
[Page 191]
bonds; and that cheek, where the living rose glowed as an emblem of the purest spring, now seemed to smile at the weary spirit's final emancipation.
I approached Colonel Aubrey—his eyes were still bent on the corpse, and all his senses were absorbed by sorrow. I would have snatched the lifeless hand of Amelia—I would have kissed it, but the distracted husband, stretching forth his arm, exclaimed, “Pollute not the ashes of your victim! insult not the cold remains of the departed angel whom you have murdered!
Mr. Randolph, who had followed me, at that moment entered the room, and looked aghast. Lady Kencarth's carriage stopped at the door; I heard the deep groan issuing from Mrs. Woodford's bosom: the combination of horrors seemed to encompass me—I quitted the scene of death, and darted out of the house like the fiend of Desolation.
[Page 192]
The day became gloomy, the wintry wind howled among the stupendous rocks, and the rain poured in torrents down their craggy sides; while I, scarcely knowing whither I bent my way, continued to walk rapidly along the narrow path which winds beside the Avon.— The phantom of Amelia seemed to follow me—her voice in imagination met my ear amidst the loudest whistling of the storm, and my mind was agonized to frenzy. I threw my feverish form at the foot of a jutting precipice, and resigned myself to the very misery of sorrow. The elements conspired to aid the dreadful chaos of my bewildered brain. I had outraged the very laws of Nature, and her dreadful artillery was pointed at the devoted wretch who had been her pupil, and was destined to become her victim.
I remained in the solitary seclusion till evening closed; the twilight was
[Page 193]
tempestuous; the black clouds rapidly shut out the last glimpse of day, as if impatient to deepen the horrors of my destiny. The torrent roared down the rocks beside me; the raven screamed above; the keen blast hurried by, sometimes whistling shrilly through the flinty apertures, and at others deeply moaning between the dark and towering ramparts; while the troubled current of the Avon rolled with a sullen murmur along the winding and tremendous chasm.
Such a scene, Rosanna, would have maddened a stoic's brain: I leave you to judge what were the sensations of a being, born to be the very fool of nature!
[Page 194]
CHAP. LXXXV. I remained in this dark and troubled solitude the whole night in the wildness of despair! I had left my hat at Mrs. Woodford's; the rain beat incessantly on my burning head; the wind pierced my agitated bosom; and at the first glimpse of dawn, I presented to the pitiless eye of Heaven the image of a maniac. I rose from my melancholy seat; my limbs were almost petrified; my cloaths were drenched with the midnight torrents, and my strength exhausted by the agonies of affliction.
With slow and feeble steps I returned towards Bristol. I was obliged to pass Mrs. Woodford's lodging: as I approached the house my persecuting genius prompted me to enter. A female
[Page 195]
servant opened the door; I rushed by her, and hastened towards the room where I had, on the preceding day, left the lifeless remains of the once-beautiful Amelia.
I found Colonel Aubrey seated near the sofa, with his arms folded, his eyes fixed on the corpse, and his countenance settled into the deepest melancholy. The faint dawn entered the window; a taper, burnt to the socket, shed a glimmering light around the apartment. I threw myself at the feet of my friend and patron.— “Behold, said I, “the wretch who was sent into this breathing world for your destruction!—the ill-fated mortal, whom destiny has at last driven to the worst scene of human sorrow! It is fit that I should expiate my crime; I only wish, before I shake off this weary miserable being, to convince your mind that I have been an involuntary criminal.
[Page 196]
Colonel Aubrey remained unmoved, while the paleness of his cheek, and the frequent tears which flowed from the full channels of his heart, convinced me that his ear was deaf to every sound, his senses beyond the touch of every pang except that which destiny had rendered incurable.
I returned to Bristol. My mind was bent on self-destruction, and every object that met my eyes seemed hateful to me; I loathed the very fun. The busy hum of men jarred on my aching brain, and a burning, wasting fever scorched up the source of circulation. I stopped and purchased a phial of that drug, which can lull the throb of agony, or wrap the weary sufferer in the long sleep of death. The boy who sold me the fatal potion, seemed unwilling to let me have so large a quantity.—I pleaded the inconvenience of a painful malady, and the necessity for having the means of rest during a
[Page 197]
tedious journey. These reasons silenced his scruples, and I hastened to Mr. Randolph's with my pernicious treasure.
On my arrival, I found a letter which had been sent express from Glenowen; I flew to my chamber, and eagerly opened it; the contents were as follows—
“Lose not a moment, Walsingham, if you wish to see the expiring Lady Aubrey. The awful period of elucidation is at hand; hasten, I conjure you, hasten to witness the eventful moment.
“ Isabella .”
I wrote two letters—one to Lord Kencarth, apologizing for my sudden departure —and the other to Mr. Randolph, who still remained with Mrs. Woodford at the Hot-wells.
The close of my disastrous life seemed rapidly approaching, and my weary mind was scarcely susceptible of any deeper
[Page 198]
impression than that which it had received by the death of Mrs. Aubrey.
Before noon, I set out in a post-chaise for Glenowen; the scene of my early sorrows—the spot where my insant mind had been poisoned by prejudices, which the expansion of reason had not been able to exterminate. Oh Rosanna! how heavy did my heart feel! how perpetually did memory turn to past events, and at every recapitulated scene bid me shrink almost to annihilation.— For what could I then hope to live?—to regret the prospects which time had seen fading in hourly sadness? to bear the reproaches of violated friendship, the agonies of self-reproof, the pain of disappointed hope, and the stigma of ingratitude? These were the links that chained my troubled spirit, that bade it linger round the ruins of departed peace; and still I hugged them to my heart, though they chilled it to the centre. I had no
[Page 199]
sweet incentive which might allure me on to cherish life; no dawning perspective to calm the throbbings of my lacerated heart; no watchful eye to cool my feverish brain with the balm of sympathetic pity. Oh Nature! amidst thy infinity of changes, thou hadst not one hour of consolation in store for a wretch whom thy stern laws had propelled to error; thy sensibilities, thy fatal sensibilities to guilt! I looked on every side: —I endeavoured, among the threatening storms that gathered, to descry one ray that promised a closing hour of calm and tempered lustre. All was dark and dreary; while I felt conviction strike upon my mind, that, though Time's perpetually moving wing might overshadow the lengthening catalogue of griefs engraved upon my heart, it never could be entirely effaced, but by the sleep of death. Then, why did I protract the pangs, the miseries which were destined
[Page 200]
ultimately to close the scene of unexampled sorrow.
My journey was tedious and melancholy. I fancied every moment an age, while suspense and doubt pressed painfully on my senses. The idea of Lady Aubrey's death gave rise to a variety of hopes and fears. A dread, which was blended with the impatience of curiosity, possessed my mind; and I rather thought it incumbent on me to summon all my sortitude for a new trial, than anticipate a release from the heavy pressure of misfortune. The depth of winter rendered the roads in some places nearly impassable; and after two days and a night of incessant travelling, during which time I met with innumerable obstacles to lengthen the weary hours, at last I arrived within five miles of Glenowen.
The floods, which had been formed by mountain torrents in many parts of the country, were particularly deep in the
[Page 201]
vicinity of the manor-house. I therefore discharged my chaise, and determined to proceed on foot, by a cross-road, which would shorten the distance at least three miles. It was at the close of day that I set out to complete my journey. The weather was clear and frosty, and the moon, just rising above the dark eminences beyond Glenowen, promised to light me, secure from every danger. I felt a strange and mournful depression of spirits, as I approached the churchyard, —the resting-place of the pure and gentle Penelope. When I came to the grave, I stopped;—I could not pass it without an emotion of sorrow, which rushed into my eyes, and quivered round my heart. The moon-beams fell on the white spire of the village house of prayer, and the long grass, which the bleak wind from the mountains waved to and fro over my parent's ashes, was sprinkled with the chilling dews of evening. I
[Page 202]
raised my eyes towards the heavens; the sky was dappled with white clouds gliding rapidly along, at times wrapping the moon in a thin veil which cast a shadowy light on every distant object. The manor-house, which during the full splendour of summer was embosomed in a rich dell of vegetation, was now visible amidst the bare and leafless branches. The whole scene was changed since I had last beheld it, and the tenour of my mind seemed to follow the desolation of nature, with a degree of sympathy that was undescribable.
While I stood for a moment near my mother's grave, I heard a foot-passenger at the little gate which opened from the church-yard to the park; he was whistling, —but on a sudden became silent. I observed him looking over the low wall, and thinking myself the object of curiosity, was proceeding to meet him, when in an instant he was gone. I
[Page 203]
called, “Who passes?” No person answered. I proceeded across the park towards the wood,—the scene of that dreadful night's events which banished me from my native home, to wander over the earth, the sport of capricious fortune.
When I came to the termination of the wood, I found that the lower ground of the park which led to the manor-house was entirely inundated by the various torrents that had fallen from the adjacent precipices. I had no possible means of reaching the family mansion, but by returning more than half a mile, and taking a winding path from the church-yard, along the side of the mountain. With speed that was accelerated by the impatience of disappointment, I re-trod the wood, and re-passed the grave of my mother. The night became cloudy, and the moon dimly shone through a thick and hazy atmosphere. Still I pursued
[Page 204]
my way, till I came to a part of the acclivity, where the path was rugged and narrow, when I again heard footsteps following, and again challenged the person, by an inquiry, whether I was in the right road to the manor-house: no answer was returned, and I continued to walk hastily.
I now recollected that the path which I trod was originally made by order of Sir Edward Aubrey, for my pleasure, when I was an infant. It was by the same road that I used to ascend the breezy eminence, and imbibe the morning air when health and innocence were the inmates of my bosom. I remembered the sportive gambols I had played to excite the smiles of my patron, and the many summer evenings when we had descended the rough slope, as the sun sunk in the horizon, diffusing its crimson lustre over the surrounding scenery.
[Page 205]
While I was wrapt in reflection, and almost heedless of the narrow path, which hung over a declivity of considerable depth, on a sudden I felt my arms seized and pinioned behind me.—I resisted:— the assailant pushed me with all his strength, and I fell headlong down the side of the mountain. In my descent I received a blow on the temple, from a projecting block of stone, and with great difficulty saved myself from rolling to the bottom, where the waters were collected in a deep and extensive lake. I found that no limb was broken, though I had fallen near sixteen feet; and, with some difficulty, again climbed to the path from which I had been precipitated; my head bleeding violently, and my body covered with bruises. I proceeded as speedily as I was able towards the manor-house: on entering the portico, my voice, which was nearly exhausted, brought the family to my assistance; and among the rest,
[Page 206]
I was glad to recognize the honest North Briton, old Andrew Mac-Gregor. His joy at seeing me was warm and undissembled: —Sir Sidney and Isabella were also unbounded in their greetings.
My wound was closed with bandages, and the effusion of blood stopped. Every person in the household seemed anxious to assist me, and no one was more zealous than my ancient enemy Mrs. Blagden. She lamented the accident, as she termed it, and was at a loss to account for its happening; but her smiles, speciously put on to cover the secret malice of her heart; her sighs, which arose from disappointment more than pity, did not escape the penetrating observation of Sir Sidney Aubrey: his indignation was evident; —it awakened ideas which, till that moment, never entered my mind. I watched his countenance;—it was mysteriously pensive;—a contraction of the brow, with a half smile, the effect of
[Page 207]
well-founded scepticism, presented an index of his thoughts, while the subtle Mrs. Blagden lamented my misfortune with more than natural sorrow.
I found on my arrival at Glenowen, that the letter which I received at Mr. Randolph's had been sent, by express, to Lady Kencarth's in Hanover-square, from thence dispatched after me to Bath, and forwarded to Bristol by the assiduous attention of my pupil.
I was ushered into Lady Aubrey's apartment, where I found her in a state of health at once so dangerous and extraordinary, that my astonishment was not to be concealed. Her form was wasting rapidly; —her features shrunk, and ghastly;— her mental faculties seemed to partake of the debility of her frame, and she scarcely knew me. At the period when I beheld Lady Aubrey in this dreadful situation, she had been married ten days; during six of which, her painful and alarming
[Page 208]
symptoms of dissolution had hourly augmented. Mrs. Blagden perpetually attended her; Sir Sidney and Miss Hanbury by turns undertaking the task of midnight watching. I know not why, but as I entered the chamber, the blood seemed to curdle at my heart. I shuddered. —My cousin observed the instinctive sensation, and a deep sigh stole from his breast in unison with my feelings. Mrs. Blagden with upraised eyes put on the semblance of sanctified submission. I inquired for my new relation, Lady Aubrey's juvenile husband;—and was informed that he had on that evening set out for Abergavenny to fetch a physician. I remained near the pillow of Lady Aubrey till the hour arrived when she was to take an opiate, ordered by a village apothecary. I then took my leave, and retired to my chamber; Sir Sidney and Isabella remained with the invalid.
[Page 209]
My suspicions being awakened by the attempt on my life, and confirmed by my aunt's extraordinary illness, I resolved not to undress myself that night, but to keep a vigilant watch on every thing that was passing. The fawning attentions of Mrs. Blagden, the absence of her nephew, and the stern indignation which was visible in Sir Sidney's countenance, convinced my mind that all was not right. The apartment which was destined for me, was at a considerable distance from Lady Aubrey's chamber: I had taken a book from the library more to keep me awake than to amuse me; and a large wood fire being kindled to air the room, which was spacious and lofty, I threw myself into a chair, determined to pass the remainder of the night in watching.
[Page 210]
CHAP. LXXXVI. The house was perfectly still within, but the wind blew shrilly round the outside, as it descended in frequent gusts from the neighbouring mountains. The book which I had chosen to amuse me, was of little service, for the perpetually busy intruder, Thought, prevented my attending to the effusions of fancy, while such mysterious realities demanded my attention. As I contemplated the retrospect of my past life, I found that the prominent events had been in general anticipated by a presentiment, as extraordinary as it was certain. The impression of the moment when I called this circumstance to mind, rather inspired me with a calm and steady resolution, than any anticipation of approaching trials. I opened my book, hurried over
[Page 211]
a few pages, made two or three turns round the room, arranged my fire, and again, with a vacant eye, read several lines, without knowing the subject or even the words they presented. Finding that books could not divert the mind from the pressure of thought, I laid my volume on the table, and with folded arms began to muse without interruption.
An hour passed, and every thing had been tranquil, when a sort of rustling commenced in the gallery which led to my apartment. I concluded that Lady Aubrey was worse, and was taking my light to visit her chamber, when I heard a loud knock at my door. I inquired who was there; but no person answered. I passed into the gallery, but saw nothing. The singularity of the circumstance surprised, but it did not alarm me. I re-entered my chamber, and again listened with increased attention: presently the
[Page 212]
knock was repeated.—I suddenly rushed towards the door, and on opening it, I perceived a sword lying near the threshold. —I took it up, and returning to my room began to examine it. The blade was nearly cemented to the scabbard by rust, and the hilt, though curiously wrought, was evidently of an ancient fashion. I remembered having seen this antique weapon before; and I also recollected Mr. Hanbury's telling me that it once belonged to Sir Sidney's grandfather.
As I drew the sword from its scabbard, and looked earnestly at the embossed hilt, I perceived the crest of the family. The mysterious manner in which it was left at my door; the silent hour of midnight; and the variety of strange events that had previously occurred, bore marks of suspicion almost amounting to a certainty of danger. I again seated myself by the fire, and during another hour the house was perfectly still.
[Page 213]
The wasting taper convinced me that morning was rapidly drawing on. I opened my shutters, but there yet appeared no glimpse of day:—the moon was declining behind a mountain, faintly lighting its summit, while every object in the foreground was wholly in obscurity.
By slow degrees the solitary hour passed on, and the blue tint of dawnlight at length began to render the scenery faintly visible. Every thing looked melancholy, cold, and dreary. I beheld the leafless branches, which in the glowing season formed a rich and interwoven forest:—I saw a quivering and extensive lake spread over the low ground of the park, which I had left in the verdant garb of summer. I thought, that if any thing could reconcile my heart in sighing an eternal farewel to my native scenes, it would be the gloomy desolation in which I then beheld them.
[Page 214]
Rosanna,—did not the idea bear some analogy to the general tenour of the human mind?—I thought it did; and my cheek reddened when I reflected, that our affections are too frequently alienated, when cheerless desolation menaces their object.
As soon as it was day I hastened to Lady Aubrey's chamber, first concealing my sword behind the hangings of my bed. I found that Sir Sidney and Isabella were still with my aunt, by whose pillow they had watched ever since I left them. Lady Aubrey had passed a more quiet night than any preceding one since the commencement of her illness: she had slept serenely; her countenance appeared more animated; and, as I approached her bed, she made signs that she knew me. There was something so compunctuous in her upraised eyes, so sorrowful in her looks, that all my resentment ceased, and I could have sacrificed
[Page 215]
my life at that moment to have accelerated her recovery.
I had not long been in the room when Mrs. Blagden entered:—she glanced round her with a suspicious curiosity, and, with a petulant tone, demanded how long I had been there.
Sir Sidney informed her, that I was that moment come to inquire how my aunt had rested.
“How, indeed!” cried Mrs. Blagden; — “nobody could rest while chamber doors were banging to and fro all night. Some folks are mighty watchful, and mighty fond of meddling with other folks's business;—but I hate inquisitive people, and am always glad when they are disappointed.”
I made no answer;—Sir Sidney shook his head sorrowfully, and Mrs. Blagden continued:—
“I wonder that the Doctor is not come. He will set all things to rights,
[Page 216]
and clear every body that is suspected—”
“Suspected! of what?” said I, eagerly.
Mrs. Blagden reddened like scarlet: —“Why,” replied she, after some hesitation, “of not taking proper care of your aunt. I am sure I have watched her like a galley slave, so I have, and I get no thanks neither; and since some people thought it necessary to send for those whom Lady Aubrey despises, let them wait upon her. I don't want to be troublesome; I can withdraw whenever my company is irksome. My nephew will take care that I am properly provided for; and I shall turn my back upon Glenowen, without ever wishing to darken its doors again while I am living, God knows!”
“Perhaps it would have been fortunate for the inmates of this mansion if you had never seen it,” said I.
[Page 217]
“I don't mind that,” replied Mrs. Blagden; “I know you are all in league against me; but I'll be even with you—I'll make your hearts ache yet, before I have done with Glenowen. My nephew is Lord here; and you shall all turn out before I will bear such usage.”
“For shame, for shame! hold other language,” cried Sir Sidney.
“Then order Mr. Ainsforth to be gone,” said the duenna; “be grateful for my hindness to you, and remember that you are in my power; I can render you odious to the whole world whenever I chuse to take the trouble. As for Mr. Ainsforth, I don't know what business he has here at all, or why he was sent for. Lady Aubrey could not want any body's assistance while I was with her: for the whole universe can tell what a friend I have been to this family, and what a slave I have toiled like all my lifetime.”
[Page 218]
“I shall not intrude much longer,” said I, with a heavy heart: “Heaven knows that all places are alike to me; I do not wish to provoke your malice, or to interfere with Sir Sidney's happiness. ‘Life is a voyage, in the progress of which we are perpetually changing our scenes 14 ;’ and those that I have witnessed already have been so replete with sorrows, that a deeper sense of misery never can be felt, while the smallest variation will not fail to dispel the glooms which surround me. The darkest, the most stormy night, must yield to the inevitable return of dawn. My mind has long been tempest-beaten by affliction.—The hour of tranquillity must come, either in the solitude of life, or the dark quiet of the grave.”
“It must indeed, Walsingham!” cried Sir Sidney; “it shall come; and it will
[Page 219]
depend on yourself, how far your heart will be capable of receiving happiness as a welcome inmate.”
“I cannot even hope for happiness,” answered I. An untroubled state betwixt apathy and resignation may reconcile me to a weary existence; but the fine sensations never will again be mine. The thin and perishable texture of those nerves, which form the source of sensibility, is broken by the pressure of repeated wrongs; my heart will neither expand with joy nor shrink at sorrow— it will become an inanimate fountain of mere vitality, from whence the flow of circulation will pass, as the stream wanders through the valley, unconscious that it cherishes all it meets in its slow but never-ceasing progress.”
“Can the warmly beating heart so entirely change?” said Isabella.
“It can,” answered I; “all the spells which once held that heart in
[Page 220]
bondage are now severed. I am at last a thinking being. The stormy passions have settled into the calm of returning reason—pride, insulted pride, has produced the important victory, and I am once more tranquil.”
“Then stay, and suffer us to partake of your repose,” said Sir Sidney.
“Forgive me,” interrupted I; “but this is a scene of such mysterious suspicion, that I must depart.”
“The sooner the better,” cried Mrs. Blagden; “nobody wanted your company; the house is full enough, without interlopers. You bring nothing but trouble—and you will leave nothing behind you but joy for your absence.”
“I shall leave my friendship for Miss Hanbury and Sir Sidney,” said I; “my gratitude to Lady Aubrey for the short period of kindness which cherished my infancy. And you, madam,” addressing Mrs. Blagden, “you shall have that
[Page 221]
place in my memory to which your persevering malice has entitled you.”
“You will not leave us, Walsingham?” said Isabella— “you cannot.”
“Pardon me, Miss Hanbury,” answered I; “but I must quit this scene of enchantment: I know its perils; by long and painful experience I know them! Let me therefore embrace the tranquil interval of reason, and fly from that magic which has too often fascinated and beguiled me.”
“With Reason for your monitor, there can be no danger,” said Sir Sidney; “you must not think of abandoning my mother in such a situation.”
“I must,” answered I, after a pause of several moments.
Lady Aubrey suddenly darted her hand towards me, and catching my arm, feebly cried, “Oh, Walsingham! do not, I conjure you do not leave me.— Stay, stay; for my poor Sidney's sorrows
[Page 222]
will want the sympathy of friendship.”
She hesitated—her hand trembled— her voice faultered—she struggled with the strong emotions of her mind, and she so far overcame them, as to continue her intreaties.—
“You shall not go,” said she; “I have a world of wonders to disclose.— Heaven!—oh, Heaven forgive me.”
Mrs. Blagden shook in every joint—
“Lady Aubrey is delirious!” said she with a countenance of dissembled sorrow; “she knows not what she says. Lord have mercy upon us! this is dismal work indeed! you had better leave her.”
My aunt started up in her bed: “Oh! not with Mrs. Blagden,” said she; “for pity's sake do not leave me to her mercy. The hour of repentance is come; and my anguish is unutterable. Colonel Aubrey—”
[Page 223]
She could not proceed.
“What of him?” said I, eagerly.
She waved her hand—but her strength was exhausted, and she had not power to speak. Sir Sidney hid his face on his mother's pillow—Miss Hanbury burst into tears, while Mrs. Blagden, with a ghastly smile, muttered revenge. The latter shortly after quitted the room— My cousin, with Isabella, promised to remain incessantly with Lady Aubrey, while I went to the parsonage in search of Mr. Hanbury, with the hope that I should be able to explain those events which, during our separation, had prejudiced him against me.
I was again obliged to traverse the narrow path that wound along the side of the acclivity from which I had been precipitated the preceding evening.— The marks which my feet had made on the rough slope were still visible, and I was at a loss to account for the singularity
[Page 224]
of the adventure. The dreary scene lost nothing of its impressive sadness by the return of day-light.—The cold dim sky of a winter morning reflected in the wide lake, half frozen over, and the leafless branches incrusted with a white frost, were strikingly contrasted by the black vegetation which cloathed the adjacent mountains, still more than half concealed by the thin blue vapours which floated round them.
I stopped to contemplate the scene. —Every source of painful, fond remembrance still presented itself, though changed and robbed of all its original attractions. The parsonage was entirely covered with the stems of vines which in my youth I had planted. The church of Glenowen had been recently embellished, and its newly whitened walls added, I thought, a chilling coldness to the landscape. Notwithstanding the season,
[Page 225]
and the mournful aspect of every object before me, I could not help feeling a sort of melancholy pleasure, when I reflected that fate had once more permitted me to behold my native mountains.
The conversation which had passed that morning at the manor-house now recurred to my memory; and a wish faintly stole across my mind that Sir Sidney and Isabella might renew their invitation. The dreary ravages of winter, thought I, will pass away, and renovated nature will again bloom, amidst her vast variety of splendours. The woods will bend beneath their weight of foliage —the mountains glow with summer radiance —the birds enliven the most sequestered shades with their wild melodies —and I shall not witness the beauties of my native solitude! I sighed— “I will remain at Glenowen,” said I—for
[Page 226]
Fancy whispered that I had been making a long journey, during which I had encountered many difficulties; that the busy, the fatiguing changes of every lingering hour were past; and I returned to that peaceful asylum, where toil and sorrow were destined to repose in safety. My opinion of attraction, originating in instinct and cherished by nature, is perhaps romantic; but it has ever been the pleasure of my most melancholy moments to look with Fancy's fascinated eye towards
MY NATIVE HOME.
O'er breezy hill or woodland glade,
   At morning's dawn or closing day,
In summer's flaunting pomp array'd,
   Or pensive moonlight's silver grey,
      The wretch in sadness still shall roam,
      Who wanders from his Native Home.
[Page 227]
While, at the foot of some old tree,
   As meditation soothes his mind,
Lull'd by the hum of wand'ring bee,
   Or rippling stream, or whisp'ring wind,
      His vagrant fancy still shall roam,
      And lead him to his Native Home.
Though Love a fragrant couch may weave,
   And Fortune heap the festive board,
Still Mem'ry oft would turn to grieve,
   And Reason scorn the splendid hoard;
      While he, beneath the proudest dome,
      Would languish for his Native Home.
To him the rushy roof is dear,
   And sweetly calm the darkest glen;
While Pomp, and Pride, and Pow'r appear,
   At best, the glitt'ring plagues of men;
      Unsought by those that never roam
      Forgetful of their Native Home.
Let me to summer shades retire,
   With Meditation and the Muse!
Or round the social winter fire,
   The glow of temper'd mirth diffuse;
      Tho' winds may howl and waters foam,
      I still shall bless my Native Home.
[Page 228]
And oh! when Youth's extatic hour,
   And Passion's glowing noon are past;
Should age behold the tempest low'r,
   And Sorrow blow its keenest blast;
      My shade, no longer doom'd to roam,
      Shall find the Grave a peaceful Home .
CHAP. LXXXVII. When I entered the garden of the parsonage-house, I stopped to collect my shattered resolution, and the first object that met my sight was the bower which I had made for Isabella: it was nearly destroyed by the wintry wind; the hoops which supported the leafy canopy in the season of vegetation, were broken, and only held together by the interwoven twigs, which time had rendered strong and numberless. I was obliged to pass quite close to this once dear retreat,
[Page 229]
and my eyes involuntarily turned towards it: I beheld the rude bench where I had beguiled many a studious hour. It was notched and carved in various devices; among others, the name of Isabella was distinguishable in every direction. I placed my hand before my eyes, paused a moment, and then, endeavouring to shake off the phantoms which memory was rapidly gathering round me, hurried towards the parsonage.
I entered the little parlour in which, sleeping on my bed of hay, Lady Aubrey first found me. “Pshaw!” cried I, with a mixture of impatience and regret, “why will these things occur to my mind at such a moment?” Finding nobody in the lower rooms, I ascended to my chamber. I contemplated every trifling object with an interest that made me shiver. The casement, from which I had so often watched for Isabella, had demanded several minutes of fixed attention,
[Page 230]
when a servant girl entered the room. At the sight of a stranger she started, and her cheek grew red. I relieved her from the astonishment that was visible in her countenance, by inquiring for Mr. Hanbury.
“He is con away,” cried the little mountaineer. “He has tacken a long journey, Cot pless him.”
“A journey!—whither?” said I earnestly.
“To Pristol,” answered she, curtesying; “to perry his rich relation. The news camed this morning, and my master was sorely grief'd when he heard of it; for, Cot preserve him, he has a coot heart as effer man had, and those that do him wrong will surely go to the tivil.”
“I hope that Mr. Randolph is not dead?” said I, scarcely able to utter the words.
“Troth, and that he is; as ted as a stone, poor coot man. He has left my
[Page 231]
master plenty of riches, and, Cot knows, he desarves it; for he has pin very sad and sick of late, and, in coot troth, I was afeard he would die, and go to Cot a-mighty, pefore my Lady Auprey was con to the tivil.”
“Mr. Randolph dead!” said I, unable to stir from the spot where I then stood.
“And, I pray you, why are you so grief'd?” cried the Welsh servant. “No coot comes of sorrow, when one can't mend it by criffin?”
“Oh God! when will my anguish cease!” exclaimed I. “When will thy chastening hand arrest the scourge of justice, and consign my aching bosom to the silence of the grave?”
I quitted the parsonage, and, with a mind labouring to resist its new source of affliction, returned as speedily as possible to Glenowen.
[Page 232]
As soon as I entered the manorhouse, I hastened to Lady Aubrey's apartment;—she was sleeping. I beckoned Isabella, and she followed me into the gallery. After some preparatory hints, I revealed the melancholy tidings:—she wept abundantly. “Forgive me, Walsingham,” said she, “if I shed tears at an event which renders you independent of all your enemies: I know that Mr. Randolph's fortune will be divided between us. He was rich, and I trust that you will yet be happy.”
I recollected the scene of Mrs. Aubrey's death;—my brain seemed to shrink with horror. Miss Hanbury was yet a stranger to the fate of Amelia, and I had not courage to reveal it.
On my return to Lady Aubrey's room, I found Mrs. Blagden sitting by her pillow. Her countenance convinced
[Page 233]
me that she knew the cause of my distress, and Isabella's tears. “You were in a mighty great hurry to take yourself off,” said she. “Had you treated me with a little more civility, I should have given you a letter, which Mr. Hanbury sent to the manor-house early in the morning. But some folks are so haughty, and hold their heads so high, that one is afraid to approach them.”
“A letter!” said I; “give it me quickly.”
“I hardly know what I have done with it,” replied Mrs. Blagden, looking round the room. “But it is of little consequence; he has not left you a shilling, I dare say. Your scandalous goings on have long since lost you his regard, and now you must thank yourself if you die a beggar.”
She now produced the letter from her pocket: the seal had evidently been broken. It was from Mr. Hanbury,
[Page 234]
who had just heard of my arrival, informing me of Mr. Randolph's death, and desiring me to come to the parsonage without delay, as he was, in a few minutes, going to set off for Bristol.”
“When did this letter arrive?” said I.
“Soon after day-break,” replied Mrs. Blagden. “But you was in such a cursed ill-humour, that I did not think of it till this moment.”
“And how did you know the nature of its contents?” said I.
Mrs. Blagden's cheek became crimson. “Why, I guessed it,” replied she.
“Oh monster!—monster of cunning and deceit!” exclaimed I.
She hurried out of the room with a determined sneer, which left no doubt of her treacherous conduct. Lady Aubrey was awakened by the violence with which the door was closed; and Sir
[Page 235]
Sidney conjuring me not to mention Mr. Randolph's death, left it should overpower his mother, I sat myself down to brood in silence over my increased affliction.
The day passed, and my aunt continued dangerously ill; no news arrived, either of the physician or Edward Blagden. The symptoms of malady increased every hour, and every heart ached for the sufferer, except the marble seat of malice and revenge, which was hidden in the breast of the infernal Judith. As night approached, Sir Sidney became almost frantic. Lady Aubrey was still sensible; and, on Mrs. Blagden's quitting her chamber for a few minutes, she called me to her bedside. “Walsingham,” said she, in a low and faultering voice, “perhaps, by the return of day, my wretched eyes will close for ever. In a small closet beyond the boudoir , adjoining my dressing-room,
[Page 236]
you will find an ivory cabinet, Mrs. Blagden knows not of it, she supposes the treasure which it holds destroyed :—it is your's when I am gone. All I solicit is, that, while I am yet permitted to prolong my miserable hour on this side the grave, you will forbear to examine its contents. Forgive me, Walsingham—forgive the weak and erring mortal, who, while the pang of death clings round her tortured heart, confesses her own unworthiness.”
Sir Sidney fell upon his mother's bed, and wept like an infant. I had not power to make any answer. Lady Aubrey pressed my hand: Mrs. Blagden returned; and I, after dispatching a second messenger for a physician, retired to my chamber.
[Page 237]
CHAP. LXXXVIII. Again obliged to pass a night of solitary watching, I arranged my fire, and threw myself on my bed to rest my limbs, though my mind had little chance of repose. The loss of Mr. Randolph afflicted me deeply; and I lamented it the more, when I reflected that the event of Mrs. Aubrey's death had occasioned him to think, however justly, unfavourably of me. The approaching dissolution of Lady Aubrey did not fail to augment the melancholy prospects which crowded rapidly on my thoughts; while the mystery, which seemed to involve every part of the family history, placed divination beyond the powers of reason. The house, as on the preceding night, was perfectly quiet soon after I entered my chamber. The weather was serene, and the awful stillness which seemed to
[Page 238]
await the repose of nature, served rather to increase than to divert the mind from gloomy meditation.
Finding it was impossible to close my eyes, while my senses were all awake to rumination, I quitted my position, and began to traverse my chamber, as I had done during the preceding midnight. The recollection of the scenery from my window induced me to open my shutter, and to indulge once more that soothing sadness, which is affliction's mildest remedy. The whole aspect of the country was different from what I had last seen it. The moon shone brightly clear, and its beams were nearly vertical; the lake was rendered a solid body by a sharp frost, and the sky presented one vast concave of deep grey, except where the moon spread a wide ring of light, to a considerable distance from the luminous orb within its circle.
A scene more solemnly tranquil never met the eye of contemplation: my
[Page 239]
mind was soothed more than depressed by the objects before me; and I sat at the window near an hour, with my eyes fixed on the vaulted arch of boundless extent, where fancy might wander till frenzy arrested the career of ineffectual thought. The night air chilled me, and I returned to the fire-side, where I wrote the following
SONNET.
'Tis Night's dull reign!—The silver-mantled queen
   Sails on her ether throne through boundless air;
Her paly lamp, which trembles o'er the scene,
   Befits the sullen sadness of despair.
The owl, her minstrel, on the leafless spray
   Shrieks to the cutting blast; while spectres roam,
Loathing their silent graves, till morning's ray
   Warns the wan phantoms to their beamless home.
Yon mountain's brow, like the gigantic woe
   Which shadows my lorn breast, with tow'ring shade
Frowns on the desolated vale below—
   Spreading impervious darkness o'er the glade:
For these again returning Spring shall bloom,
While Misery's child shall prove Despair's eternal gloom.
[Page 240]
Again I returned to the window, where I had taken my seat only a few minutes, when a knock roused me from my reverie of sadness. I instantly darted towards the door, and hastily opening it, found my old favourite, Andrew, waiting for admittance. With a melancholy countenance he approached me: I inquired what brought him thither at so unseasonable an hour?—He closed the door, and advancing towards the fire, after a short pause, replied— “Gude troth, au is not weel, lad; the deevil's emps are broke lose among the mountains, and the auld Blagden at the hede o'em. 'Tis na my business to tack pairt we the wecked, an I come to warn ye, lad, of your danger.”
“My danger!” repeated I. “What do you mean?—explain your words briefly, I conjure you.”
“Why,” answered Andrew; “did ye na ken an auld rusty sword that I left at your door last night?”
[Page 241]
“I have it. For what reason did you leave it?” said I.
“Gude troth, an I left it, to arm you against your enemies,” replied Andrew; “and you have mickle want o'sic a weapon, while ye tak up your reesidence in a hoose of Lady Aubrey's. I should be laith to scandalize any honest person, lad; for the murrain tak the promoter of conteension.”
“Well, be brief, good Andrew,” interrupted I.
“Why, then, I'll e'en teel you au I ken o'th business,” said he. “The saucy loon, who has made himself laird o'Glenowen, is na gane to fetch a doctor; for, if I be living, I saw the raegamuffin only yester-night, an I followed him to the wee tenement at the fare end o'th hamelet.”
“Are you certain that your conjectures are well-founded?” said I.
[Page 242]
“As certain as that I belang to the clan of the Mac-Gregors,” replied Andrew. “O the de'il tak the ill-spaken lout. I ken him weel when I meet him; but he was mickle shy o'me, lad:—an I had him i'th Highlands, I'd ge him as gude a dressing as ever braw Scot geed to an enemy.”
“At what hour did you see him?” said I.
“Just befare I brought the auld weapon for you to defeend yoursel, my bonie lad,” replied Andrew. “I watched him till a took shelter at the sign o'th Welsh deer at the bottom o'th hamelet.”
“At the goat?”
“A, that's the hoose; an I'll wager my mull against a poond of lawful money, that, an you have a mind, you may unkennel the fox befare day-light. By my troth, an I shanna be backward
[Page 243]
in carrying a dirk in a gude cause. The Mac-Gregors be na given to cauld heartedness, when an honest lad has got into the claws o'th deevil.”
As he spoke we heard the creeking of shoes along the gallery. “Hearken!” cried Andrew; “did ye hear nathing?”
“I did;—but it might have been the wind through this spacious building,” said I.
“Nae, 'twas na the wind; but 'twas the witch that rides in't,” replied Andrew. “I ken the step o'th hagard —saving your presence—as well as I ken the cloven foot of the auld one.”
“Well, never fear,” said I.
“Fear!—Gad's blude! was there ever a Mac-Gregor that was given to fear?—An you ken the battles o'Flouden and Dumblain, you'll find the whole clan as brave as lions, and as— Hearken, did ye na hear something?”
“Nothing, my good fellow,” said I.
[Page 244]
“An there was one of my ancestors,” continued he, patting his leathern snuffbox, “that was found we fifty gude stabs through his bonnet, and as many in his heart; an a never quitted his clan for aw that, lad—till deeth put an end to his valour, and left nathing but his fame to prove his legeetimacy. Now, as for this auld deevil----Did you hear nathing in the gallery?”
“I thought I heard footsteps,” said I; “therefore be brief.”
“Gude troth, an I'll tell you au I know when we meet again,” said Andrew. “It winna be long, for I have mickle news to tell ye; an au aboot auld Mestress Blageden. I should be laith to breed any ill blude i'th famely, till I have packed up my alls and am jogging for the Highlands.”
At this moment my door was shook nearly off the hinges: Andrew turned pale.—I could not help smiling.
[Page 245]
“'Tis either a witch, or the deevil, or auld mestress----”
Again he was interrupted by a loud blow on the wainscot.
“We'll talk o'this another time,” cried the honest Scot; “maire hears than prudence ought to inform. Down i'th glen, near the wee gate which leads to the hamelet, I'll watch for you in aboot an hour. Do'na fail to come, an you wish to be guarded against your enemy.”
Andrew opened the chamber-door, and, after peeping out to reconnoitre the enemy's post, stole on tip-toe up the stairs to his apartment, leaving me more bewildered than ever.
Day-light soon appeared, and I hastened to the place of appointment; eager to know the meaning of old Andrew's caution, so frequently repeated. I waited a considerable time, but no person came to satisfy my curiosity. I
[Page 246]
strolled to and fro from the glen to the village, passing the little gate at every turn, and listening with eager inquietude. I had taken the rusty sword under my great coat, and the scene being solitary, I fell into profound meditation, almost forgetting the place, and the motive that led me to it.
I had passed more than an hour at this lonely spot, when Andrew came running towards me. His countenance was expressive of stern indignation, and his manner more alert than I had ever before seen it. I hastened to meet him; he was out of breath with the rage of his bosom, and the expedition of his feet. He entered the glen, and seating himself on the root of an old tree, began to unfold the trouble of his mind in all the bitterness of wounded pride, and all the scorn of dignified resentment.
I found that Mrs. Blagden had dismissed him from the service of Lady
[Page 247]
Aubrey, and that, with such degrading epithets as the pride of a Mac-Gregor could not tamely endure. No reason was given for the sudden resentment of the tyrannical duenna, except that he was too apt to meddle with the private concerns of the family.
Andrew's agitation and evident distress affected my feelings. I considered myself in a great measure as accessary to his degradation; I attributed his being discharged from Lady Aubrey's service to the visit he had paid me on the preceding night, and the conversation that had taken place respecting Edward Blagden; while my regret was only to be equalled by the high opinion I entertained of his honesty.
My sorrow was infinite while I reflected that another object had been destined to suffer for an attachment to me and to my fortune. The kind-hearted Andrew wept tears of indignation; and while he
[Page 248]
execrated the malice of his enemy, he rejoiced in having warned me to be guarded against mine.
“I winna leave you, lad,” cried he. “I'll find a habitation at the hamelet, and watch ye weel, til the sculking loon is brought to shame; and then I'll e'en jog bock to the Highlands. I canna come to more disgrace than to be cau'd a traetor—an auld, gude-for-nathing, pemping, begarly, oat-meal vagabond! The de'il tak the Jeezable an au the clan o'em! I'd rather peck theestles au my days than wear the badge o'servitude we sic an auld Scareamouch.”
“Be not too hasty, my good Andrew,” said I; “Mrs. Blagden will not always be the tyrant of Glenowen. But where is the sign of the ‘Welsh Deer,’ which you mentioned as the place of her nephew's concealment?”
Andrew rose abruptly from his seat, and bidding me follow, hastened down
[Page 249]
the village. When we came to a small public-house, that had been opened since I had quitted Glenowen, I observed the Goat which was painted over the door, as an invitation to travellers. We entered and inquired after the landlord— he was not at home: I then demanded whether Mr. Blagden had been there during the last two days: I was informed that he had called for a moment, but his horse was kept in waiting, and he departed speedily.
“For what did he call?” said I.
“To bathe his arm, which was sprained, so as to become intolerably painful,” replied the servant girl.
“Why did he not apply for assistance at Glenowen?” said I.
“The young 'squire said that he was afraid of alarming my lady,” answered the girl.
“And how came he to sprain his arm?” said I, continuing the conversation.
[Page 250]
“By opening the park-gate on horseback.”
“Had he no servant with him?”
“No; 'squire always rides alone about the manor.”
“When do you expect the landlord to return?” said I.
“Not this fortnight.—He is gone to Hereford to buy cattle for 'Squire Blagden.”
“Your master's name?”
“Davy Apprece, your honour.”
Finding no chance of obtaining any satisfactory information from the simple girl, I walked with Andrew as far as the parsonage, where I left him, and returned to the manor-house to inquire the cause of his being so suddenly discarded.
[Page 251]
CHAP. LXXXIX. I found that during my absence the physician had arrived. He was with Lady Aubrey when I entered her chamber, and, by his looks, I perceived that her situation was as dangerous as I had before thought it. After giving directions for the treatment of his patient, and dispatching a servant with a prescription, he quitted the room. Sir Sidney with myself followed him to the saloon. Isabella, by a whisper from me, continued with Lady Aubrey; Mrs. Blagden stood sullenly dissatisfied during the physician's visit; and the scene of mystery seemed opening to a speedy elucidation.
We entered the saloon, and the door was closed. The physician's features
[Page 252]
were settled by deep and fearful rumination. —He trembled to disclose that which he dared not keep a secret; I construed his lowering brow and hesitating manner, while they unfolded a page of insamy that made every nerve thrill with anticipated horrors.
I inquired whether Lady Aubrey was in any danger—he shook his head—— “She may survive it,” said he with impressive regret; “but the chance scarcely amounts to probability; the symptoms are of an alarming nature—their origin unquestionably—poison.”
Sir Sidney leaned upon my arm, and seemed to lose the power of utterance— his face was pale, and every limb shook convulsively: my situation was little better. The physician looked earnestly at each by turns, and addressing Sir Sidney, continued—
“How or for what purpose it has been administered, Heaven only knows!
[Page 253]
But I think it my duty to apprise you of Lady Aubrey's state, and of the means by which she is reduced to such imminent danger. The circumstance might have been accidental. Had the aid of medical skill been procured at an earlier period, the fatal consequences might have been prevented.”
“Were you not requested by Mr. Blagden to visit Lady Aubrey?” said I.
“Never,” replied the physician.
“Stay, I conjure you, stay with my mother,” cried Sir Sidney: “This dreadful business must be investigated.— A parent's life, the reputation of innocence, and the punishment of guilt, are objects of too much importance to let the energy of justice slacken in inquiry.”
“God forbid that I should charge any person with the crime of premeditated murder!” said the physician.
Sir Sidney's agitation was ungovernable —he conjured me to search the
[Page 254]
deep and horrible attempt even to the most minute circumstance.
“I did—I do suspect,” said he, “an infamous concerted plan to destroy my mother; but the suspicion was of such a nature, that, circumstanced as I am, it might have been placed to the account of malice.”
I urged the propriety of keeping our awakened vigilance as secret as possible. By any sudden shew of apprehension we should have afforded the criminal time to escape, and the enormity of the deed would perhaps have attached itself to an innocent object.
The physician remained with Lady Aubrey; Sir Sidney and Isabella sat up in her chamber, and Mrs. Blagden kept close in her own apartment. I walked up and down the long gallery during a great part of the night, musing, and at the same time dreading to inquire whenever the smallest noise was heard in the
[Page 255]
house: it was an epoch of horrors. The silence of the hour—the idea that Lady Aubrey's situation was occasioned by a domestic assassin, the worst of murderers —the story repeated by old Andrew —and the mystery of Sir Sidney's birth—occupied my thoughts, and bewildered them almost to madness. The crime of attempting Lady Aubrey's life seemed to rest between Mrs. Blagden and her nephew, Edward; which to accuse, or whether to charge both with its enormity, puzzled and perplexed me. I resolved, however, on the following day, to make some effort which should either authorize my suspicions, or exonerate the objects of them.
While I was with slow and cautious steps traversing the gallery, I heard at intervals deep and smothered groans, which, by their repetition, at length fascinated my attention. I stopped at the door of Lady Aubrey's chamber,
[Page 256]
and listened:—and within was as still as death. I again walked to the farther end of the gallery, and again the murmur of stifled agony fixed me to the spot. I entered my chamber, and opening the window, listened several minutes; the only sound that met my ear was the low whisperings of the wind among the leafless branches of the adjacent wood. While I was contemplating the moonlight solitude, I perceived something come forth from among the trees, and advance towards the manor-house. I drew back, still keeping my eyes fixed on the person, though concealing myself from his observation. He paced to and fro: I could only indistinctly see his figure, without being able to judge of his age, dress, or features.
After observing him some time, I armed myself with the ancient sword which Andrew had left at my chamber door, and was again proceeding along
[Page 257]
the gallery, when I heard several words inarticulately uttered in a tone of agony. I stopped:—the sound came from an apartment on the second story; a private stair-case led to it, and with caution I ascended. I now heard footsteps very distinctly, and the exclamation — “Oh God!” frequently and emphatically repeated. Perceiving a light under the door, I ventured to try the lock, and it opened. The object who had excited my curiosity was Mrs. Blagden!—she was pale, and her eyes appeared swoln with tears. She started at seeing me, and, for a moment, seemed bewildered with amazement; but the natural and prompt malevolence of her heart quickly suggested the means of revenge. She seized me by the collar, and began to shriek, while she vociferated, “Murder!” till the whole mansion echoed with the sound. The chamber was, in a few minutes, a scene
[Page 258]
of universal consternation. Mrs. Blagden held me firmly, and I was too much astonished to think of escaping. She protested, with the most awful and solemn oaths, that I had concealed myself in her chamber to destroy her; and the sword, which was found upon me, seemed to corroborate her asseverations.
Sir Sidney was overwhelmed with horror: Isabella wept, and lamented my rash conduct. The domestics united in execrating the enormity of the attempt, and Mrs. Blagden persisted in the accusation. “Fly!” exclaimed she; “oh fly, and procure some means to punish the villain!—the assassin!—the vile wretch!—who has long sought my life, and whose crimes deserve the justice of his Maker.”
I was almost petrified with horror;— I could only articulate— “This sword was given to me by honest old Andrew;
[Page 259]
it was merely meant for my own defence.”
“Against whom?” was the unanimous question.
“I know not,” said I. “Send for Andrew, and let his evidence acquit me of the infamous charge alledged against me.”
This assertion, instead of influencing my hearers in my favour, seemed a strong confirmation of guilt. Andrew had been dismissed from Lady Aubrey's service by Mrs. Blagden, and my bringing him as an evidence in my favour, conveyed an idea that he was an accomplice in the plan to destroy his enemy. Mrs. Blagden knew that a dark cloud of suspicion hung over her, and that the more she endeavoured to blacken my name with supposed criminality, the less my evidence against her would be credited in an hour of investigation.
[Page 260]
A messenger was dispatched to find old Andrew. I was now left alone with Sir Sidney and Isabella; their grief was scarcely utterable. They conjured me to make my escape, and not to brave the vindictive spirit which I had roused to vengeance against me. I protested my innocence; informed them how and when I had received the sword, with all the particular circumstances which Andrew had related. “Alas, Walsingham!” exclaimed Sir Sidney, “I wish to believe that you are innocent —I think you are; but the enemy you have to encounter is powerfully malevolent:—appearances are strongly against you, and, if you remain here, the consequences may prove fatal.”
“If I depart, it will seem a confirmation of my supposed guilt,” said I.
“Events may place Mrs. Blagden in a point of view that will, perhaps, acquit you,” cried Isabella.
[Page 261]
“Then I must await that period,” said I firmly: “I have too long been the victim of appearances; it is time that the sombre shadow should be dissolved by the penetrating rays of truth; life has been a weary journey, and the sooner it is over the better. Send for an officer of justice—I demand a fair investigation of my conduct; I also insist that Mrs. Blagden be detained on suspicion of having poisoned Lady Aubrey.”
Sir Sidney started, and trembled convulsively. — “Almighty God!” exclaimed he, clasping his hands and raising his eyes towards Heaven, “What a moment is this!“
I now rung the bell—Sir Sidney closed the door and locked it.
“Walsingham, yet stay an instant,“ said he: “do not irritate the serpent whose sting will either annihilate my mother, or separate me from her in so perilous a situation; for my sake be patient;
[Page 262]
you know not the danger of provoking Mrs. Blagden. My dear but misguided parent may yet recover; she may live to render justice, to know the malice of her tyrant, and to repent of that fatal confidence which has produced these dreadful consequences. Would you, if it is Lady Aubrey's destiny to perish, embitter her last moments by the conviction that I am a vile, forsworn, deceitful monster?”
There was something so painfully energetic in Sir Sidney's voice and manner, that I was unable to answer him.
“Follow your cousin's counsel, I conjure you,” said Isabella; “whatever you may suspect Mrs. Blagden as capable of committing, I do not think that she is guilty respecting Lady Aubrey. The absence of her nephew leaves but too dark an evidence of his criminal intentions.”
[Page 263]
A confused noise interrupted the conversation; it seemed to issue from the wood near the manor-house. I approached the window, and perceived a large throng hastening through the park towards the portico. Sir Sidney rushed out of the chamber, and Isabella fell senseless on the ground before me.
I soon discovered that the crowd, amounting to more than sixty persons, was composed of the peasantry in the neighbourhood of Glenowen. Mrs. Blagden had dispatched several domestics, in all directions, to alarm the country; and to report that I had attempted her life, and poisoned Lady Aubrey. The indignation of the rustics was fermented almost to frenzy;—they demanded the horrible delinquent, and menaced annihilation in ways as numberless as they supposed the crimes of the object which excited their revengeful purpose.
[Page 264]
Sir Sidney expostulated with the enraged multitude from the steps of the portico. Their clamorous demands reached my aunt's chamber, and overwhelmed with terror, she fainted. Mrs. Blagden availed herself of this event; and, from the window, declared that Lady Aubrey was expiring. Sir Sidney was instantly overpowered; the people rushed into the hall, and, in a few moments, several of the most determined entered Lady Aubrey's chamber. Her death-like countenance, the shrieks and lamentations of Mrs. Blagden, Isabella's trembling form at the same moment feebly advancing along the gallery, and my horror-stricken features, seemed the incontrovertible evidences of a crime, at which my soul shuddered, while my tongue lost the power of pleading its innocence. I was instantly seized, my arms bound with cords, and, amidst the curses of the credulous rustics, conducted
[Page 265]
to the village till a chaise could be procured for my conveyance to Abergavenny.
CHAP. XC. The little Welch girl at the parsonage had made a bed for old Andrew, and he passed the night considerably soothed by the good humour and humanity of his evening associate. The messenger which I had sent, soon returned with my trusty friend, who fully confirmed all that I said in my defence respecting the sword, and the conduct of Edward Blagden. My vindictive accuser, notwithstanding, demanded justice, and the incensed throng still seemed sceptical as to the defence which I made, and which Andrew vehemently corroborated. All would not
[Page 266]
do:—the multitude insisted on my departure, and every expostulation having failed to convince them I at length consented to their wishes.
During our journey towards Abergavenny, the concourse of people augmented every mile, and, by the time that we appeared before the justice of the peace, some hundreds of persons were collected to witness the important examination. Upon a strict inquiry it was discovered, that there was not sufficient ground for my commitment to the county gaol; the mere assertion of Mrs. Blagden could not criminate me, and the fate of Lady Aubrey being yet undecided, I was permitted to return to Glenowen, after Andrew had made oath that her dangerous symptoms commenced previous to my arrival.
The tide of resentment now turned against Mrs. Blagden and her nephew. Every tongue was clamorously loud in
[Page 267]
menaces, and every mind impressed with sorrow for the injustice of my accusation. Old Andrew, notwithstanding the affronts offered to the dignity of his family, resolved on returning with me to Glenowen; on braving the wordy storm of his furious antagonist, and on assisting me in bringing to justice the assassins of Lady Aubrey. We travelled with all possible expedition. On our arrival at the manorhouse, we were met by Sir Sidney and Isabella; the former embraced me with the ardour of a friend, and the latter wept tears of joy, that recompensed me for all my sufferings. The physician was still with Lady Aubrey; she was considerably better. The event which had happened to me had been concealed from her knowledge, and Mrs. Blagden had never quitted her own apartment during my absence.
I again had a private interview with Sir Sidney and Isabella: I conjured
[Page 268]
them to take such steps as should bring those monsters to punishment who had attempted the destruction of Lady Aubrey. Still my cousin shuddered at the idea:—his agitation was terrible. He uttered every epithet in abhorrence of the vile perpetrators of an act so atrocious, and yet he had not resolution to investigate the mystery. His manner seemed to convey an embarrassment wholly abstracted from the present source of inquietude, and the dread of injuring Lady Aubrey predominated over that justice which was due to the enemies who had sought to destroy her. I could not form the slightest conjecture of my cousin's extraordinary motive: every word which I uttered, to enforce conviction of what I thought his duty towards a suffering parent, only augmented his perturbation. His grief seemed undissembled; his abhorrence of the deed, such as evinced the genuine
[Page 269]
humanity and filial affection of his heart. But there was yet a stronger, darker spell, which chained his tongue in silence, and which baffled the efforts of conjecture, while they palsied the hand of justice.
My honest friend Andrew remained at the parsonage. I was resolved to await the fate of Lady Aubrey; to investigate the cause of her illness, and then to quit Glenowen, however painful such a step might be to the feelings of my heart, for ever. Another night passed, and no ray of light yet elucidated the mystery. On the following day, Sir Sidney was unable to quit his chamber; the fatigue of watching, and the perpetual anxiety of his mind, produced a fever, and the physician began to apprehend the most fatal consequences. Orders were given that no person should see him except Lady Aubrey; and the manor-house was more completely a scene of sorrow than ever.
[Page 270]
My mind, with a painful accuracy, revolved over all the scenes of past inquietude in which Sir Sidney had been the main spring of action. I recollected the wild, yet noble eccentricities of his youth—his liberal conduct towards Colonel Aubrey—his kind, his unaltered friendship for me—and his filial virtues, which prompted a mild and graceful forbearance under the rigours of maternal severity. Now that he was in danger of perishing, the victim of duty and sensibility, I beheld, with an unprejudiced eye, his many and distinguished perfections; all the jealousy of my heart respecting Miss Hanbury had been effaced, as its aching fibres resisted and subdued the enthusiasm of affection. Friendship began to build a pure and sacred basis on the wrecks of a mistaken passion, while the delirium of the senses was lulled by the soothing return of reason.
[Page 271]
Lady Aubrey recovered hourly, while Sir Sidney's fever increased till the most serious apprehensions filled every bosom except that of Mrs. Blagden. The same torpid indifference, the same hardened inhumanity—the horrible characteristics of a sordid, barbarous mind—were evinced, as during the recent peril to which Lady Aubrey had been exposed, for motives which yet remained secret and undefinable. I passed my nights in the most painful inquietude. My aunt, who had recovered sufficient strength to sit up in Sir Sidney's chamber during the day, was in a state of mind bordering on despair. Mrs. Blagden, in the routine of her occupations, frequently met me; but a sneer of hatred, or a malignant glance, was the only notice she bestowed; while I, with calm and well-founded contempt, neither shrunk at the one, nor paid attention to the other.
[Page 272]
Adjoining to Sir Sidney's chamber was a small boudoir . The physician had positively commanded that no person except Lady Aubrey should be admitted to his patient during the crisis of a fever which hourly augmented, and which presented symptoms of the most dreadful nature. In this boudoir I had passed two nights, watching with trembling apprehensions, and dreading every moment to hear the last sigh of the generous and noble Sidney. Mrs. Blagden would frequently enter for a moment, and as suddenly depart; always bestowing some horrid execration on my devoted head, and menacing vengeance on all those whom she termed her enemies. Lady Aubrey never quitted the chamber of Sir Sidney, night nor day. A sofa was placed near his bed, and her attentions, mingled with agonizing sorrow, were unremitting.
[Page 273]
On the third day of my cousin's illness, I received a message from old Andrew, requesting that I would without delay repair to the parsonage. I obeyed the summons, and, at the close of evening, met him hastening through the churchyard to bring me a letter, which had been sent by express from Mr. Hanbury. We returned to the parsonage, and, with a trembling hand, I broke the seal. Andrew would have prevented my reading the contents, and entreated that I would suffer my spirits to become more tranquil before I ventured to encounter a new trial. I closed the letter—paused a few moments—anticipated a confirmation of the fatal intelligence which had been communicated by the Welch girl—and concluded that Mr. Randolph's just resentment had wholly precluded me from any friendly wish in his last moments.
[Page 274]
Andrew perceived the perturbation of my mind, and, snatching the letter from my hand, exclaimed— “By my sol, but you are as teemed as a woman. Ge me the paper, lad, and I'll tell ye au it contains; for I should be laith to see ye mak a loon o'yoursel, and forget the deegnity of manhood by whempering like a baby. The de'il a bit are you worthy to be the friend of a Mac-Gregor, if you canna bear the brunt o'misfortune, as well as the sunshine of prospeerity. Wha can pretend to be faint-hearted, when they see the honour o'my famely blurred by the habit of a sarving loon? In gude troth, I am the first of my clan that ever disgraced his blude by wearing a levery.”
As he pronounced these words he shed tears, which, in spite of all his efforts to suppress them, gave a contradiction to his words, while they evinced the gentleness of his nature.
[Page 275]
After several minutes past in serious and painful reflection, again I ventured to open Mr. Hanbury's letter. It was hastily written, and contained only a few lines; stating, that, in consequence of Colonel Aubrey's earnest solicitations, Mr. Randolph, in his last moments, had forbore to alter his will, by which he had bequeathed the whole of his property, amounting to forty thousand pounds, “to be equally divided between Isabella Hanbury and Walsingham Ainsforth.”
The letter dropped from my hand;— I had not power to speak. Such unexampled generosity to one whose conduct had forfeited every claim to his esteem, made a deeper impression on my mind than any act of persecution could have done. Indeed, Rosanna, so sensible was I of my own unworthiness, that I almost wished his rigour had been equal to my rashness; for the spring of compunction
[Page 276]
never fails to flow when the source is touched by the power of generosity.
Andrew, after an effort which I could scarcely summon resolution to make, heard me read Mr. Hanbury's letter. When I came to that part which informed me of the last liberal action of a life which had uniformly done honour to humanity, the venerable servant burst into tears:—I could not proceed. “Take the letter and finish it thyself, my good Andrew,” said I; “and when thou hast given vent to the sympathy of thy feeling heart, follow me to the manor-house. I will make thy peace with Lady Aubrey, and time will awaken thy enemy to compunction for the injustice of her conduct.”
I hastened home, little exhilarated by the acquisition which my fortune had experienced, though deeply depressed by the anguish which I felt for the loss of such a patron as Mr. Randolph.
[Page 277]
As I approached the manor-house, I perceived a carriage waiting at the portico, with a courier and two servants on horseback. On a closer view, I found that they wore the livery of Lord Kencarth. I hastened to meet my pupil, and flying across the hall, rushed into the saloon, where I found his lordship in conversation with Mrs. Blagden.
“Dash me, my hearty, but here I am again,” exclaimed his lordship. “Fine news!—I'm dished—done up. The sharps have queered me; and, quiz my nobility, but Topas is a deep one. Would you believe it, tutor?— they have taken possession of Hanoversquare; and, dash my sconce, if all is not gone to the hammer.”
“I can believe that any calamity will follow the confidence which you placed in such a fawning, cringing vagabond,” said I. “But remember that
[Page 278]
I bid you beware; I cautioned you not to trust him.”
“Dish my wig, but there are at least a dozen putting in their claims for a share of the booty,” replied his lordship. “There's Pannel the coachmaker, though my kencarth has only been finished three days;—and I received a letter just as I was quitting Bath from the old Duke, demanding payment of his ten thousand guineas, with a neat postscript to the same tune from my worthy friend the obliging Pimpernel. So you see, my dainty, I have nothing to do but to marry a golden dolly, or give my creditors the go-by, with a brace of barking irons. Now as you are my tutor, my deep one, and I am your pupil, queer my caxon if you shall not decide the business: bullets or a wise;—'tis all one to me;—only I should like to follow a wiser head than my own, and do the thing in stile.”
[Page 279]
“I trust that there will be no necessity for either,” said I. “The remedies are equally desperate; and, in either case, require some consideration. Shall I instantly set out for London, and endeavour to arrange matters so as to pacify your creditors?”
“Quiz my nobility, but Topas nicked the family plate, and has lumped it by this time, with my pink diamond into the bargain: sold the whole kit for six hundred, queer my sconce, and left me not a dish large enough to hold a deviled drumstick. Then as for Pannel, he has nabbed my kencarth, my highflyer, my tandem, and old Alltrap's landau into the bargain. There's your deep one! What say you now, tutor?”
I shook my head and was silent.
“This isn't the whole, my hearty,” continued his lordship:— “They were all sported at Tattersall's, along with my hunters, racers, roadsters, and my bit of
[Page 280]
blood that used to walk me about the streets in the morning. Dish my wig, but all this didn't vex me. There's worse yet to come, tutor, queer my nobility.”
“Indeed!” said I.
“My best polygraph is dead! dead as a nail, dash my jasey! died last Sunday. News arrived from Bath that I was down of a fever with little hopes of getting about again. Queer my sconce, if my polygraph didn't get drunk five nights following, till his pulse was up to a physician. Quiz me, but old stiff-wig came a day after the fair; poor graphy was taken in, kept his bed three days, and hopped the twig on the fourth, queer my nobility! But this is not all, my deep one. Dash me, I was obliged to bury my ghost, lest he should continue to frighten the Dowagers, and set me down as a dead letter on the list of knowing ones.”
[Page 281]
“Had he no relations to perform that last act of kindness?” said I.
“Perhaps he had,” replied Lord Kencarth; “but they wou'dn't have known him if they had seen him. He had been the polygraph of three different deep ones. First he was the walking shadow of an unpopular character; and personified his prototype, dish my jasey, to a miracle. But in his perambulations, his ears were so often affronted by sarcastic remarks, knowing observations, sharp hits, and queer truisms, that, quiz my nobility, but he shifted his shape, and, like a true grub, approached one degree nearer to insignificance. He next became the phantom of a noble Viscount; but it would not do; three fêtes and a court equipage dished his fortune, to the last guinea; while all the world laughed at him, and nobody respected either his taste or his prodigality. Men scouted him, women quizzed him,
[Page 282]
tradesmen dunned him; and, strange to tell, even his original was ashamed of his folly.”
“Well,” said I, sighing, for my heart was heavily laden with sorrow, though my ear listened to my pupil's incessant volubility; “well, let us leave such insects to the inevitable storms of fate, and think on subjects of more consequence. I have just heard of a dear friend's death, and my regret is infinite.”
“I'm sorry for it,” interrupted his lordship hastily; “but you shall hear what happened to my poor polygraph.”
“Mr. Randolph was the worthiest of men!” said I.
“Very likely,” cried my pupil; “but, queer my nobility, will you listen? I have a treasure in store for you, my hearty; dash my jasey if I am not your best friend after all. You little think what a deep game I have played to make your fortune.”
[Page 283]
“ My fortune! I do not comprehend you,” said I; “pray explain yourself.”
“When I have done my story,” answered Lord Kencarth.
I nodded assent. “Well, go on,” said I, knowing that it was impossible to put him out of his way.
He continued.
“The third person that poor Proteus undertook to personify, was a young Baronet. With a month's starvation, a crop, and four flannel waistcoats, he contrived to pass current among Jews, jockies, low women of all characters, and high women of no character at all; till having outrun the constable, and not knowing a flat that would give him tick for a shiner, dish my sconce but he was nabbed six times in one week;—did the deep ones with Jew-bail, till they were up to the trick: so, not having either the fortune or the honesty of his prototype,
[Page 284]
he dabbled in trade, popped into the Gazette, and three month after started again with a new face, as my representative.”
“The loss of such an appendage to fashionable notoriety must be terrible indeed,” said I.
“Dish my jasey, but it is unlucky just at this moment,” cried my pupil; “for as he shared the glory of the day, queer me, but he should have lived to partake of the disgrace. But this is not all, tutor; I have met with another misfortune almost as severe as the death of poor graphy!—Lady Alltrap is off! —off with old Heartwing, quiz my sconce!—She found that the sharps would dish me, and levanted without even bidding me farewell. So that now I have lost my reputation, been cheated out of my fortune, my polygraph dead, and my old girl deserted me, quiz my
[Page 285]
discretion, but I have nothing left to console me except my bull-dog and my tutor. So if you have a mind to marry, and travel, the Dowager has promised me five thousand to pay expences. I have found you a wife;—my estate is out at nurse;—and I'm your neat pupil all the world over, queer my caxon.”
“I will with pleasure attend you on your travels,” said I. “The change of scenes will perhaps solace my mind, and strengthen your experience. But as to the wife,—you must pardon me;— I am in no haste to marry.”
“O! but by all that is quizzical you must, tutor; I have made the bargain,” said his lordship;— “a nice girl, with thirty thousand pounds, and as thorough-bred a neat thing as ever ran over the course of notoriety:—dish my jasey but you must have her: I promised her that I would do the thing in stile, and you cannot be off.”
[Page 286]
“I trust that you are not serious!” said I, “for in my present state of mind it is impossible to think of marrying.”
I had scarcely uttered these words, when Miss Hanbury entered the saloon, leading by the hand the lovely, blushing, trembling Lady Arabella! I started as though I had seen a spectre, while Lord Kencarth, giving me a sharp rap on the shoulders, exclaimed, “What think you now, my hearty?—Here she is, ready to leap into your arms: we have given Duchess the go-by, travelled post from Bath, and nothing is wanting now but a parson, dash my modesty.”
Lady Arabella would have quitted the saloon, but my pupil detained her: I had not power to utter a syllable, and the scene was perfectly ludicrous. After some moments, I summoned recollection sufficient to pity the distress which I had evidently occasioned in Lady Arabella's mind by my cold reception of her; and
[Page 287]
placing my confusion to the account of sorrow, I made some awkward bows,— stammered out a few incoherent words, —expressed my gratitude, while I lamented her kindness, and took the first opportunity to quit the saloon; leaving the astonished trio to form their conjectures respecting my extraordinary conduct.
I hastened to my chamber, and, half bewildered with the perplexities of my situation, began to ruminate on a variety of plans, without resolution to fix my mind on any. I could not condemn the zeal of my pupil, though it had involved me in such a dilemma; I considered my conduct towards Lady Arabella as scarcely pardonable; for I now found by experience that I had played round a flame, which, though it could not warm my heart, had not only misled my judgment, but endangered my integrity. Another circumstance rose up in
[Page 288]
weighty proof against me. When I trifled away my hours of gallantry with Lady Arabella, I was piqued at Miss Hanbury's neglect,—and I was a beggar. Honour whispered to my mind, that though I could shake off the spells which her beauty, for a time, wound about my heart, the display of that indifference which succeeded my caprice, would, by the world, be misconstrued; and censure would not fail to place the sudden change to my increase of fortune, rather than to the decrease of my passion for Lady Arabella. Thus, in danger of being accounted sordid, in affliction for the loss of my dear friend, my curiosity awakened respecting the mystery of Sir Sidney's birth; and with something like a tender interest still struggling in my bosom for Isabella, I was by the imprudence of professions, made in the language of common-place gallantry, and by the mistaken zeal of a thoughtless friend,
[Page 289]
obliged to marry a woman, whose person I did not care for, and whose mind I scarcely knew. But I had gone too far to effect an honourable retreat, and was therefore obliged to surrender every hope, every prospect of future happiness. Yet even under the cloud of despondency, reflection paused to pity the wretched imitators of Proteus, whom my pupil had described: those mistaken trifling mortals, who, to gratify the false ambition of a moment, ensure eternal disgrace, while they make it the labour of their lives to copy those follies, of which the dullest among them would, blush to be the originals.
[Page 290]
CHAP. XCI. The dilemma in which I had now involved myself seemed to promise either indelible disgrace or perpetual penance. I had been led away by the ignis satuus of the passions; the dazzling flame which plays about the senses for a time, and then vanishes into nothing, while the dawn of reason opens, and shedding a genuine lustre on surrounding objects, harmonizes the mind, and takes from it every thing deceptive. The brilliant graces of Lady Arabella, though they embellished the circles of dissipation, were of a species too gaudy for the tranquil scenes of life. Like the splendid illuminations of a ball room, they glittered to the vacant eye of folly, while they banished all the train of sober enjoyments
[Page 291]
from the mind; enjoyments that are best felt in the calm shades of repose, the noiseless solitudes of unsophisticated nature.
Could a being, weary of the vicissitudes of fortune, disgusted by the duplicity of mankind, sickening at the very name of pleasure, and struggling with the strong impressions which memory had imprinted on his brain, be happy with such a woman as Lady Arabella, even with all her powerful attractions, her interesting graces, and bewitching vivacity? Impossible! One smile from Isabella,—one kind look or word of returning sympathy, would have triumphed over the united powers of all her sex, even if every individual possessed more than the charms of Lady Arabella. Yet, honour commanded that I should keep my promise. I had, in the warmth of a momentary caprice, offered my hand in marriage. She accepted
[Page 292]
the proposal when I was a beggar, and I could not, when the smiles of fortune placed me above the misery of dependance, when she had deserted her family, and with voluntary generosity determined to bestow her person and fortune on me —I could not abandon her to the ridicule of the world; and to the humiliation which her self-love would consequently experience. The crisis of my fate was rapidly approaching; I had only this alternative—to bear the reputation of being a mean, capricious, sordid hypocrite, or to endure an eternal penance, for the impetuosity of my passions.
After an hour of agonizing conflicts, I determined on the latter. I resolved to expiate the long catalogue of crimes, into which my follies had so often led me, and to become the contrite husband of Lady Arabella. I returned to the saloon, where I found the lively fugitive, with
[Page 293]
my pupil and Miss Hanbury: I endeavoured to assume the placidity of resignation: the solemnity of my manner was placed to the account of regret for the loss of Mr. Randolph, and the day passed in a gloomy series of thought, which even the eccentricity of my pupil could not enliven.
Sir Sidney continued extremely ill:— Lady Aubrey's constant attention, united to her anxiety of mind, impeded her recovery; yet she could not be prevailed on to leave my cousin's chamber, while by unremitting assiduity and sorrow she evinced a change of sentiment as unaccountable as it was honourable to her feelings.
Mrs. Blagden seldom quitted her own apartment: her seclusion originated neither in a sense of shame nor a pang of compunction: she courted solitude, to brood over mischief; and while she enjoyed the scene of present perplexity,
[Page 294]
she anticipated the triumphs of approaching vengeance.
On the morning after Lady Arabella's arrival at Glenowen, I rose early, and strolled towards the parsonage, to see my old friend Andrew, who inflexibly refused to become an inmate of the manor-house while Mrs. Blagden presided as governess of the family. Passing the wood on the upper ground of the park, I met Lady Arabella: it was impossible to avoid her notice; she inquired whither I was going; and on my informing her that my visit was to the parsonage, she proposed accompanying me thither. We continued to walk hastily, till we came to the churchyard. I pointed out the grave of my mother; when I repeated the epitaph which was engraved on her tombstone, Lady Arabella dropped a tear,—it was the pure celestial gem of feeling, and her cheek never looked so lovely as at that moment.
[Page 295]
On entering the parsonage, Andrew presented me a second letter which had just arrived from Bristol. I opened it with a sigh which I could not suppress, and read the contents. They informed me, that Mr. Hanbury only waited to attend the funeral of Mr. Randolph, after which he purposed setting out for Glenowen: He concluded his letter with these words: — “Fortune has at length placed you above dependance, and happiness will now be within your reach, if the follies of the world have not contaminated the sensibilities of nature. There lives a being, Walsingham, whose affection has never ceased to sympathize in your fate, and whose virtues will, I trust, reward you.”
I read the passage over and over. A variety of conjectures crowded on my mind, each succeeding the other, with a rapidity that bewildered me. Lady Arabella observed the agitation which
[Page 296]
the letter occasioned, and, with a degree of tender solicitude that increased my agony,conjured me to allow her that participation in my sorrows which friendship claimed, and which reason would hereafter sanction. “Can you refuse so natural a request to one who is destined to share with you all the future vicissitudes of fortune?” said she: “So united as we are by bonds of faith and affection, have I not a right to hope for that unbounded confidence, which will strengthen esteem, and lighten the load of sorrow under which you labour?”
I shuddered!—The gentle tone of her voice, and the generous language which it conveyed, seemed to proclaim me a wretch beyond the reach of consolation. I conjured her not to distract me with her kindness,—hastily tore the letter, and, after a short conversation with Andrew, proposed returning to the manor-house.
[Page 297]
As we walked towards the park, she again renewed the subject of her intreaties: “Indeed, Walsingham, your unkind reserve has humbled me so much in my own esteem, that I can scarcely believe myself worthy of your affection: why, with an opinion of my truth, so sceptical, why did you take such pains to fascinate my regard, and to produce a decision in your favour, which has exposed me to the censure of the world? I cannot return to my home: I dare not meet the resentment of my mother. I never would have consented to place myself under the protection of Lord Kencarth, had I not believed you sincere, as I knew him to be honourable. He assured me that your attachment to me had induced you to visit Bath.”
“He told the truth,” said I, awkwardly.
“Then how have I since forfeited that attachment?” continued Lady Arabella.
[Page 298]
“Is it the temper of your mind to diminish in affection, in proportion as sacrifices are made to gratify your vanity? Oh, Walsingham! how unworthy of such a mind as yours is this levity,— this weakness! Leave the empty vanities of love to libertines and fools, and learn to value the female heart, in proportion as it encounters every misfortune with zeal and fidelity.”
“I cannot defend myself.—I am the most criminal of mortals!” said I. “When I professed to adore you, my senses were fascinated by the beauty of your person. I now know the inestimable graces of your mind;—I respect, I admire them.”
“Must I venture to build all my hopes of happiness on the icy basis of respect and admiration?” said Lady Arabella. “Must I rely on the fragile charm of what remembrance only presents, and hope to be beloved, because your senses were once
[Page 299]
fascinated by the little boast of beauty which nature lent me?”
She blushed and trembled.—I knew not what to say.—Her chagrin, her evident distress, penetrated my soul;—I recollected the fate of Amelia Woodford; —I pitied the susceptibility of the female mind, and more than ever condemned the barbarous levity of my own sex, which suffers the head to dictate what the heart is incapable of feeling. This was the second instance of my folly, in supposing that I acted under the influence of passion, when jealousy and wounded self-love formed the real source of every thought that actuated my conduct. Amelia was the victim of my affection for Isabella. That dreadful sacrifice rose up in judgment against me; and I shivered with horror, while I shrunk with compunction.
After a pause of several minutes, Lady Arabella again addressed me.
[Page 300]
“It is but too evident that my vanity deceived me,” said she, sighing deeply; “my neglect of one who really adored me has proved that love is ever sure to punish his apostates. When I first saw you at Bath, I was engaged to marry him, who, piqued at my capricious conduct, is now the husband of Lady Aubrey.”
“Edward Blagden!”
“Even so,” replied Lady Arabella; “and to you I owe the loss of his affections: for you I have incurred the displeasure of my family, the censure of the world; and, as a punishment for my blind credulity, you consign me to the resentment of the one—the insults of the other. But I am told, that the diminution of your regard originates in the augmentation of your fortune.”
“Who has dared to accuse me of such baseness?” said I hastily, and interrupting her.
[Page 301]
“Mrs. Blagden, Lady Aubrey's friend—the mother of the ill-treated, the rejected Edward,” replied Lady Arabella, with a tone of proud disdain that stung my heart.
“Mrs. Blagden is a wretch beneath your confidence,” said I. “It has ever been her pleasure to traduce my name, and it shall in future be my pride to baffle her malignity. The idea that you can suspect me of an interested motive has decided my resolution:— accept my hand, lovely Arabella;— would to God I were more worthy of your kindness! I am a frail, an insignificant mortal; but there is not in this weak, this inconstant heart of mine, one particle of avarice:—there is not, by Heavens, Arabella.”
She smiled, and faintly answered— “I believe you. Think no more of my childish suspicions: I know you are incapable of deceiving me, and I will
[Page 302]
rely henceforth implicitly on your honour.”
This promise rendered my fate decisive. Her cheek wore the blushing smile of confidence, while my heart trembled at the sentence which honour had sternly pronounced against its future happiness.
In the course of the day, I revealed what had passed to Lord Kencarth. He commended my decision; and, as secrecy was not one of his good qualities, he speedily communicated the subject of our conversation to the whole family. Not an individual seemed satisfied with my choice: Lady Aubrey was more than usually melancholy, and Miss Hanbury frequently quitted the room to conceal her tears. I endeavoured to reconcile my mind to my approaching union with Lady Arabella: I made every effort to indulge the flatterer Hope; but the demon of Despair seemed to
[Page 303]
menace me through the tinsel veil of pleasure, and to predict the certitude of sorrow, amidst the proudest glow of anticipated splendour.
I passed a night without sleep; every moment was devoted to reflection; and all the events of my life again crowded in melancholy succession on those senses which were nearly annihilated by sorrow. Alas, Rosanna! how little did I know my heart when I supposed, that, because it was wounded by neglect, tortured by jealousy, chilled by contempt, and lacerated by compunction, it was shielded by disdain against the attacks of sensibility. I felt, at this trying moment, that the long-cherished and darling passion of my soul was not easily vanquished. I looked back on the sombre detail which memory presented, but I only looked to weep, and to lament that susceptibility which, in the moment
[Page 304]
of remorse, menaced a new train of evils.
In a few days, I purposed giving my hand to Lady Arabella. I felt that I was unworthy of the confidence she placed in me, and trembled while I questioned the sincerity of my heart; yet there was no possibility of receding —my honour and my pride were at stake. I had trifled with the energies of reason—I had sacrificed them to the senses: I was an offender of the most culpable species—a plausible deceiver; who, with all the enthusiasm of Nature, had violated her laws, and boldly professed myself the disciple of folly and dissipation. The fatal moment, which gave Amelia Woodford to my ungovernable passions, was darkened by deception on her part, which, with rational minds, might plead in extenuation of my conduct; but there was no such
[Page 305]
subterfuge for conscious guilt in my seduction of Lady Arabella's heart—I rushed onward to the enterprise of vanity with my eyes open, my reasoning faculties awake: day after day, I pursued the phantom which flattered my vanity; and, divested of the enthusiasm of a heated mind, coldly, deliberately assailed her bosom, till its giddy inmate yielded to the strong magic of perseverance. From Miss Hanbury I had never received any proof of affection beyond that which she might have felt for a brother; Lady Arabella had set the world's opinion at defiance— quitted her home—offered me her splendid fortune—and, what was still more attaching than all these, had relied upon my honour. This reflection reconciled me to my engagement, and gave the amiable Arabella a decisive victory.
[Page 306]
CHAP. XCII. I found on the following morning, that Sir Sidney had passed a night of extreme danger: his fever augmented, and he refused every medicine which had been ordered by his physician. Miss Hanbury, on entering the saloon at breakfast, presented a countenance of sorrow; her eyes were dim with tears, and her cheek was pale for want of rest. Lady Aubrey made her excuses, and remained in my cousin's chamber. I several times entreated permission to visit the invalid, and was as repeatedly informed, that the physician left positive orders for no person except my aunt to enter his apartment. The day passed in anxiety;— Sir Sidney had not slept during the last forty-eight hours. He talked and raved incessantly, resisted all the
[Page 307]
consolations of maternal solicitude, and at length became delirious. In this dreadful and increasing alarm, Lady Aubrey wished to procure a small quantity of laudanum, in hopes, by administering it, to tranquillize his senses. She suggested the idea to Miss Hanbury; it was by her communicated to me, and I hastened to find the phial of that subtle drug, which, in my despair, I had purchased at Bristol. It was still in my portmanteau, and I delivered it to Lady Aubrey, who instantly hastened with it to Sir Sidney's chamber.
In the evening, the physician again visited my cousin: his fears were visible in every feature, and the agony which filled the bosom of Isabella confirmed the danger of the noble and generous Sidney. Oh, Rosanna! my heart throbs, and my eyes are drowned in tears, while I proceed in my disastrous story. Another night passed in horror. The dawn
[Page 308]
again returned, and every breast still beat with apprehension:—the house was a scene of mourning. The few drops of laudanum, which Lady Aubrey had ventured to administer, had failed in the desired effect, and the irritation which they produced on the nerves of the sufferer augmented his malady:— every hope seemed to forsake us. The physician beheld no prospect of saving the ill-fated Sidney, and, with the prophetic command that the sufferer should be kept quiet, quitted his apartment with a countenance of mournful resignation.
The whole day passed in gloomy suspense: Sir Sidney had not uttered a syllable during the last twelve hours. I retired to my chamber at midnight, expecting that before day-break our despair would be complete:—all my former resentment was forgotten. The virtues, the sensibility of the liberal the generous Sidney, filled every heart with
[Page 309]
affection and sorrow. I could in this momentous crisis find an excuse even for his conduct respecting Isabella.
I passed the melancholy hours till dawn-light in traversing my chamber; frequently opening my door, and listening when the least noise excited my attention. Just as day began to break, I heard Lady Aubrey's voice, and that of Isabella, as they stole across the gallery from one apartment to another. I could not account for their being absent from Sir Sidney, and, gently approaching the door of my aunt's room, I inquired how my cousin had passed the night. Lady Aubrey assured me that he was more tranquil, and had less fever; she attributed the change to the laudanum which I had given her, and I returned to my chamber with a heart considerably lighter than it was when I left it.
[Page 310]
While I was entering my own room, I heard a door creek as it was gently opened, and, turning round to observe who was stirring, I perceived my aunt come forth, followed by Lady Arabella, wrapped in a loose robe de chambre , and scarcely awakened. They were at that end of the gallery which was farthest from my chamber, and I silently watched them, scarcely breathing with curiosity and astonishment. They entered the boudoir which led to Sir Sidney's apartment: Lady Aubrey seemed in earnest conversation with Lady Arabella; they closed the door with cautious timidity, and left me almost petrified with consternation.
I endeavoured to believe that this visit to the chamber of a man, who was the day before supposed to be dying, was merely the effect of compassion, in order to relieve Lady Aubrey from the
[Page 311]
fatigue of watching. I knew that no person was permitted to advance beyond the boudoir , and that Miss Hanbury had been my aunt's companion during the early part of the night. I fastened my room-door, and, throwing myself on the bed, endeavoured to close my eyes. But the rumination of my brain was not to be tranquillized; the variety of perplexing thoughts that rushed across it, in melancholy succession, kept me waking, though feverish for want of rest, and exhausted by perpetual inquietude.
On the following evening, Mr. Hanbury returned from Bristol. I hastened to the parsonage the instant I was informed of his arrival, and he received me with that kindness which had marked his conduct during my insancy. With a mixture of pain and satisfaction, he unfolded the particulars of Mr. Randolph's legacy. We entered upon the melancholy subject of his death with
[Page 312]
sorrow that was sincere, and regret that was poignant. But you will judge of my consternation, Rosanna, when he read the following passage in the will of my deceased patron:— “I bequeath the sum of twenty thousand pounds to Walsingham Ainsforth, to be paid within three months after my decease, upon condition that he marries my niece Isabella Hanbury. In refusal of this my last solemn injunction, the said Walsingham Ainsforth shall receive only the sum of ten thousand pounds; the remaining half to be paid to my nephew Walter Hanbury.”
I was overwhelmed with confusion: my engagement with Lady Arabella was yet a secret to Mr. Hanbury, and my chagrin was infinite. The loss of ten thousand pounds could not affect me; Lady Arabella's fortune was treble that sum. But with the choice of my bosom—the darling of my youth—the
[Page 313]
first and dearest object of my affections— poverty would have been preferable to splendour, and a mountain hovel, the abode of that felicity, which the proudest palace of prodigality could not have bestowed, with any other woman.
With some difficulty I concealed my emotion till Mr. Hanbury concluded the last line of Mr. Randolph's will; when, folding the parchment, while he dropped a tear to the memory of departed virtue, he thus addressed me:— “Walsingham,” said he, “this liberal and earnest injunction of my generous uncle will, I trust, put a period to all your anxieties. There was once reason to believe that an union with Isabella could not possibly take place; another object, whose happiness was then at stake, so far influenced her mind, as to arm it against your merit, and her own inclinations. Time has, I trust, obliterated the impression of a young and
[Page 314]
volatile fancy, and the sober dictates of reason will remove that bar which has hitherto impeded the completion of your wishes. Sir Sidney Aubrey—”
“Spare me the painful recapitulation of sad events,” said I; “the present moment is sufficiently replete with tortures.”
I could scarcely speak. After a conflict that wrung my heart, I continued— “Oh, my friend!—my earliest, and best protector!—how shall I learn to bear this new and agonizing trial of that fortitude which is almost wearied into feebleness by perpetual exertions?—The graces, the virtues of Isabella, deserve a better fate than that of her being wife to such a wretch as I am!—for you see before you the most ill-fated of mortals—the Pupil of Nature—the victim of prejudice—the heir to misfortune!—From my infancy I have been the dupe of false hopes and imaginary evils: I have alternately
[Page 315]
trusted the world, and been deceived by my credulity; I have been guilty of crimes which my soul never meditated, and involved in ruin every individual that has made an effort to save me. I loved Isabella;—I adored her. Years cherished my increasing passion, which months of disdain and persecution have not yet annihilated. Hope has wearied my senses into subjection, and I am now preparing to expiate my follies by a life of perpetual penance.”
“I do not comprehend you,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury.
“Would to Heaven Sir Sidney had never returned to Glenowen!” continued I; “or that Isabella had not loved him.”
“The unhappy Sidney will not long survive a mother's false ambition,” said Mr. Hanbury, sighing; “the ravages of silent sorrow are evident in his wasting form and dejected features. I am
[Page 316]
painfully, delicately situated.—The forfeiture of half Mr. Randolph's legacy, by your refusing Isabella's hand, would enrich me, yet the union would render you completely happy. Were not this the case I should counsel you.”
“How?—I solicit that counsel; I will endeavour to follow it,” said I eagerly. “I am on the very precipice of fate;—one step will for ever destroy me.”
Mr. Hanbury started from his seat, and walked hastily about the room. His countenance was expressive of the agitation which wrung his heart. “Walsingham,” said he; “you are, indeed, the most persecuted of mortals— my heart bleeds when I retrace the progress of your sufferings; and it shudders while I anticipate those scenes which are yet to come. Isabella is the slave of friendship; her attachment to your cousin has been heroic and exemplary: it
[Page 317]
will only terminate with her existence; and that virtue, from which, I trust, no power could ever tempt her to deviate, will be fully proved when the grave shall close on the sorrows of Sir Sidney.”
“Be explicit, I conjure you,” said I. “If there is any mystery attached to the birth of my unhappy cousin, confide it in my bosom—trust to my honour, my secrecy, my gratitude.”
Mr. Hanbury approached me; he looked as if he was going to unfold some secret of importance:—his countenance became convulsively agitated, his whole frame shook with stifled emotions, and he was afflicted even to tears. “Why are you so importunate?” said he; “a few weeks will decide this dreadful business. Lady Aubrey will be prevailed upon to suffer an elucidation of events which now seem big with destruction. That fury, Mrs. Blagden,
[Page 318]
is the origin of every misery, of every impending calamity that threatens the unfortunate family.”
At this moment we were interrupted by Lady Arabella and Lord Kencarth, who came, by Lady Aubrey's desire, to request that Mr. Hanbury would immediately hasten to the manor-house. “Dish my jasey, parson,” cried my pupil, “I thought you were come to Ainsforth's wedding; but, quiz my conceit, if I am not afraid it will be poor Aubrey's burying. The good fellow is upon the go; his life's not worth six weeks purchase—not a Jew in Duke's Place would do him for half the time. The dowager is almost frantic; so, queer my nobility, but you must come and preach her into resignation, while Walsingham settles the preliminaries with Lady Arabella. Quiz my wig, doctor, what do you think of
[Page 319]
tutor's choice?—A nice girl!—the neat thing—thirty thousand—and thorough bred, dash my jasey.”
Mr. Hanbury was lost in astonishment. Lord Kencarth was entirely a stranger, and his language wholly new to the ears of classical refinement. But even the singularity of manner and conversation, which distinguished his lordship, did not so complete the consternation of the moment, as the discovery that Lady Arabella was the object of my choice. The want of confidence on my part seemed to strike Mr. Hanbury's mind with considerable force, and he had but too much reason to place that silence to the account of selfish reserve, which, in reality, originated in my fear to give him pain. His looks strongly indicated resentment —my grateful esteem took the alarm which was given to friendship; while, taking his hat, Mr. Hanbury
[Page 320]
abruptly quitted the room, and set out, for the manor-house, to obey the summons of Lady Aubrey.
“Dash my purity, but there goes a rum one!” exclaimed Lord Kencarth, as Mr. Hanbury walked with his eyes bent on the ground, down the little path which led towards the churchyard. “Why, tutor, quiz my learning, did this fellow furnish your garret?” cried Lord Kencarth; “why, all the merchandize of his brain does not seem worth the catalogue that nature has given in his features! Queer my mazzard, if he is not a walking memento mori ! cross bones and a skull!—an animated tomb-stone, without a single line on his phiz to give him a good character. Why, he looks like a musty folio in a black binding;—full of learning, and only fit for the cold regions of pedantic obscurity. Dish my jafey, but you were in the right to levant, my hearty.”
[Page 321]
I was too painfully perplexed to pay much attention while my pupil was speaking. Lady Arabella expressed her concern at my inquietude, and though she had little reason to approve Mr. Hanbury's abrupt departure, her respect for my feelings prevented her giving an opinion which she suspected would augment their irritation.
We returned to the manor-house: on our arrival we found that Sir Sidney was sleeping. The physician had just left his room, and some hopes were entertained, that a few hours rest would lower the fever which oppressed him. Isabella continued to attend Lady Aubrey in the boudoir adjoining my cousin's chamber; and Mr. Hanbury's acute distress was visible to every observer.
[Page 322]
CHAP. XCIII. Another day passed, and at the close of evening I strolled towards the village. The sky was clear, and a cutting frost augmented the sharpness of the wind that descended from the mountains. An opening which led towards Abergavenny broke the towering amphitheatre of nature which nearly encircled Glenowen, and the setting sun threw a deep crimson hue on the horizon, the warmth of whose colouring but little accorded with the freezing atmosphere of a winter twilight.
I continued to wander along the skirts of the valley, till the west shut in, and I could scarcely discern the prominent features of the landscape. As I hastened homeward across the park, I
[Page 323]
observed a man at a small distance keeping an even pace with me, till we came to a nook peculiarly lonesome and rugged, owing to the torrents which had passed over it in their descent from the mountains. Here he stopped. The obscurity of the place rendered every thing indistinct; but the sound of his footsteps suddenly ceasing, I hurried towards the spot where I concluded he waited to receive me. I had no weapon of defence but a strong oak stick: the sky every moment became more dark, and the solitary corner being overshadowed with firs, the gloom was deepened while it gave additional security to the suspected wanderer.
I advanced, and the lurking assassin entrenched himself behind a jutting grotto which was erected as an object of perspective from the south wing of the manor-house. I stole slowly and with
[Page 324]
caution towards his hiding-place. He would have retreated.
“Discover yourself,”said I, “or expect no mercy.”
“Keep off,” replied the incognito, “for I am armed: if you approach, you perish.”
“Do you wish to rob me?” said I.
“No,” answered the stranger firmly.
“Am I known to you?”
“You are,”said he. “But if ever I am tempted to assault you, it will be in my own defence.”
“Have I ever injured you?”
“That is a question which I am not obliged to answer,” said he. “Depart; do not urge me to destroy you. Again I repeat the word,—depart.”
The tone in which he spoke was rather that of entreaty than of menace. I knew not how to account for so strange an adventure. The voice seemed familiar
[Page 325]
to me.—I kept my eyes fixed on the shadowy nook, and expected every moment that he would rush forth to put his threats in execution. Several minutes had elapsed in total silence, when he again addressed me:—
“Remember the unfortunate Linbourne, and—begone.”
“Linbourne!” repeated I, with new anxiety which was blended with horror, “what of him?”
No answer was returned, but I distinctly heard, “Oh God!” murmured with an agonized sigh. The tone was similar to that which had met my ear a few nights before in Mrs. Blagden's chamber. I listened attentively;—the moon began to rise;—the firs waved to and fro with a low whispering sound, and the coldness of the air was scarcely supportable. Still I determined not to quit the spot, under the anxiety which the stranger's words had occasioned. I continued
[Page 326]
to walk hastily, measuring a short space, near the nook of concealment. Again, a stifled murmuring tone of ejaculation aroused me, and again I stopped to listen. I now saw the form of my companion standing near the entrance of the rude grotto. His figure appeared to be tall; but it was impossible to discover his age or features. “Mr. Ainsforth,” said he, “do not attempt to approach me. I am desperately situated. I know you;—we have met on less mysterious occasions:—you believe that I am dead; and you think yourself the cause of my destruction. There are reasons why nature would palsy your hand, were it raised to annihilate me; therefore do not attempt that, which would inevitably be the cause of your own perdition.”
“Are you Lord Linbourne?” said I, with a mixture of hope and agitation. The stranger returned no answer. I advanced
[Page 327]
a few paces towards the niche. “Your temerity will be fatal to you,” said the unknown person: “the moonlight will render you a distinct mark, while I am shrouded in the shadow of the mountain. I have pistols;—they are loaded. Within this grotto I have two armed associates.”
I continued to ascend the short acclivity, when a female shrieked horribly. I started back, and a voice which I instantly knew to be old Andrew's, called to me from the low-ground of the park. I hastened to meet him, still keeping my eyes on the spot where the stranger had entrenched himself. It was impossible for any persons to escape without our seeing them; and after dispatching Andrew to alarm the domestics, I concealed myself amidst a clump of firs, to watch the movements of the enemy.
[Page 328]
Every moment seemed an age till Andrew's return. There remained not a doubt in my mind, but the stranger was Lord Linbourne:—and still I was unable to guess the reason of his visit to Glenowen. The distance between us while we conversed was not more than twenty paces;—that of my removed post, somewhat more than an hundred. I waited with a degree of impatience that was torturing:—I heard the stranger whistle three times, and a buzzing of voices followed the signal. The moonlight fell on the grove of firs beneath which I had taken refuge, but the side of the mountain was still in shadow. I had waited near a quarter of an hour, the concealed person not yet choosing to venture from the nook, when I observed old Andrew, with four companions, hastening across the park at some distance. The incognito, seeing them also,
[Page 329]
rushed forth from his hiding-place, taking the narrow path along the side of the mountain with incredible velocity: I followed till I lost sight of him. It was in vain to pursue the fugitive farther: the route which he had chosen led to the high road, where, I concluded, he had horses in waiting for him and his companions.
We now returned to the dark nook in search of the female, whose shriek I had heard on my ascending the acclivity. We entered the grotto, and searched every niche of concealment, but nothing living was to be found. The domestics, who had armed themselves for a terrible rencontre, laughed heartily at what they considered a false alarm; and I returned with considerable chagrin towards the manor-house, while Andrew measured back his weary steps to the parsonage.
[Page 330]
CHAP. XCIV. So deeply was I wrapped in thought, that I scarcely felt conscious which way I was going, till I arrived at the portico. I was undecided in opinion, whether or not I ought to reveal what had passed at the foot of the mountain, till I had taken farther steps for the discovery of my secret visitor, whose motive was as undefinable, as his words and energetic entreaties were strongly impressive. With curiosity so awakened, it was impossible for my active spirit to remain tranquil: reason and nature whispered, that to investigate the business was incumbent on me, for a variety of motives; and, thoroughly persuaded that the concealed wanderer was no other than Lord Linbourne, I could not rest under the suspense and
[Page 331]
astonishment which his appearance had excited.
However deeply my thoughts were absorbed by what had recently happened, on my arrival at the manor-house, the first idea which roused me from my reverie, was that of Sir Sidney's precarious situation. I found Lord kencarth awaiting my return in the saloon; he was alone; and the information which he gave, tending but little to satisfy my mind, I repaired to the boudoir , adjoining my cousin's chamber, to repeat my inquiries. Fearful of disturbing the invalid, I opened the door with caution, and softly entered. I found no person whatever in the usual place of unremitting attendance;—no light but that which the fire supplied; while, by the universal desertion which marked the scene of former solicitude, I concluded that Sir Sidney was asleep and better.
[Page 332]
I now hastened to Lady Aubrey's apartment, and found that also empty. Surprise began to give the alarm which my senses were ever open to receive, and I again repaired to the boudoir . As I gently opened the door, I heard a low humming sound in Sir Sidney's chamber. I approached the threshold to inquire after his health, when my ear distinctly caught the tone of Lady Arabella's voice. I started. “Dearest Sidney,” said she, with an accent of the most impressive tenderness, “set your mind at ease, and endeavour to support your spirits for the sake of those that love you. Had you declared your sentiments at an earlier period, believe me, I never should have thought of Mr. Ainsforth.” I was almost petrified with astonishment.
I heard my cousin reply in language so inarticulate, and with a voice so feeble,
[Page 333]
that the words only conveyed a mingled murmur, which left me as much in doubt as ever.
After a pause of two or three minutes, Lady Arabella continued: “Why conceal your sentiments from your cousin?” said she: “I entertain so high an opinion of his generosity, that I make no doubt but he would instantly relinquish his claims to my hand, if he knew that your repose would be the forfeit of our union. His cold reception of me gave evident proof how little I am necessary to his happiness: and since you have done me the honour to declare your wishes, I shall not hesitate to break my engagement finally.”
The sensation that rushed through my heart when I heard her utter these words was undescribable: it was a conflict betwixt joy and wounded pride.—The loss of Lady Arabella was an event desirable, in my perplexing state of mind; and yet
[Page 334]
I felt piqued at the reflection that Sir Sidney Aubrey was again my rival.
I now heard Lady Arabella rise from her seat, and draw the curtains of my cousin's bed. “Heaven preserve you,” said she, “and inspire your heart with that confidence in my sincerity, which I will never fail to merit. With this assurance, endeavour to compose your mind.”
Here she paused, as if to embrace him. My cheek was slushed with a momentary glow of resentment; but it passed away, and I felicitated myself on my escape, more than I lamented her inconstancy.
I descended to the saloon, in hopes to find Miss Hanbury, to whom I longed to communicate the purport of my discovery. I recollected the conversation which I had heard in the wood, on the fatal night of my rencontre with Sir Sidney: his professions of eternal faith,
[Page 335]
and Isabella's foolish fond credulity. I found the saloon empty; and full of the important triumph which possessed my mind, I waited impatiently near a quarter of an hour, in hopes that supper would be served, and the family assembled. A thousand anticipated sources of fair retaliation seemed to burst forth on my exhilarated fancy; and while I cursed the inconstancy of the sex, I felt delighted by the hope of detecting and humbling the vanity of Miss Hanbury, while I exposed the duplicity, and rejected with scorn an alliance with the trifling, capricious Lady Arabella.
I discovered nothing new in the character and conduct of Sir Sidney Aubrey. I considered him as one of those beings who love without feeling, and change without remorse: whose vanity forms the basis of every triumph; and whose conquests pass like pleasing dreams over the senses, neither disturbing the tranquil
[Page 336]
scenes of existence, nor influencing the passions by one transient pleasurable moment. All the inquietudes of love which seemed to invade his breast, I considered as proofs of his refinement in deception: and the more he proved himself the master of his art, the less I considered him as entitled to my pity.
Another quarter of an hour elapsed, and I began to grow more impatient. I rung for a servant, and inquired after Lord Kencarth:—he was no where to be found. I then dispatched him with a message to Miss Hanbury:—she was also absent.
Lady Arabella now entered the room; with an air of easy effrontery she inquired how I felt myself after my evening walk. “The weather is intensely cold,” cried she.
“Almost as cold as women's hearts,” said I.
[Page 337]
“But, I fear, not quite so changeable,” retorted her ladyship.
“There is little merit in boasting the imperfections of Nature,” said I; “yet women will sometimes vaunt those traits which men would be ashamed of.”
“It is no uncommon thing,” replied Lady Arabella, “for your sex to condemn the very precepts you inculcate. The heart of a modern lover is sufficiently torpid to petrify even the soul of sympathy. I wonder how the torch of love continues to burn at all in such regions of inanity.”
“You are sarcastic, Lady Arabella,” said I, with assumed nonchalance . She smiled, but made no answer. “Well!” continued I, with a sigh of resignation, “you are right, I believe:—this world has little pleasure for a heart of sensibility; and those who are most gifted with apathy are the likeliest to be
[Page 338]
tranquil. For my own part, I never mean to feel again. I will abjure the very name of love, and for the remainder of my days become an anchoret.”
Lady Arabella did not seem pleased with this declaration, because it deprived her of the triumph which she anticipated in refusing me her hand. I was apprehensive that I had piqued her vanity too far; and that she would break her promise to Sir Sidney, merely for the gratification of punishing my apostacy. She reddened with offended pride, and was on the point of shedding tears. I varied the topic of conversation,—talked of the weather, an everlasting subject for animadversion, when the moments are prolonged by ennui : I then lamented the indisposition of Sir Sidney: this opportunity was too precious to escape Lady Arabella's notice, and she began with most feminine resentment to expatiate on the personal graces and mental
[Page 339]
virtues of my cousin. I knew her motive, and that knowledge defeated her purpose. Every word she uttered was confessed with reiterated praise, and new encomiums, more lavishly bestowed, than readily acknowledged.
“He is the handsomest creature breathing!” cried Lady Arabella.
“Agreed,” said I.
“The most amiable!” continued her ladyship.
“Unquestionably!” added I.
“Accomplished beyond description!” cried Lady Arabella.
“And good-natured—almost to a fault!” interrupted I.
My fair friend began to grow angry: —her cheek half smiling between resentment and contempt, changed colour, as the circulation was influenced by the sensations of her mind.— “I am astonished,” said she, with a glance of marked disdain; “I am really astonished,
[Page 340]
that such a model of perfection should not have rendered all his associates perfectly amiable.”
This reproof did not mortify my self-love: Lady Arabella's evident partiality towards Sir Sidney Aubrey, and the conversation which I had overheard in his chamber, completely chilled the ardour of a passion, which originating in caprice, was ever susceptible of a remedy.
The fair inconstant waited some time to see if her declarations excited the desired emotion in my bosom; for though she had predetermined to break her engagement, she could not bear the idea of my meeting her wishes more than half way. She tried every art of coquetry to rouse my feelings, and to pique my pride; but finding the strong bulwark of conviction too powerfully armed by resolution, she had recourse to all the light artillery of disdain. She smiled,
[Page 341]
while she bit her lip with vexation; and hummed a tune, while her eyes were glazed with tears of resentment. Had I not witnessed proofs of her falsehood, and heard the language of infidelity falling from her own tongue, I should have pitied her distress, and execrated my own versatility. But the dying embers of affection, if they once resist the breath of jealousy, will rekindle no more; though its latent sparks may undermine the heart, and, by slow degrees, consume the last atom of expiring friendship.
After a considerable interval of sullen taciturnity, Lady Arabella renewed the subject of panegyric. “I trust and hope that the beloved and amiable Sidney will yet live to ornament this world of insignificance,” said she. “Heaven knows how sincerely I should lament, how tenderly Miss Hanbury would deplore the loss of such a mortal.”
[Page 342]
The conclusion of this remark pierced my bosom acutely. Lady Arabella observed the rapid revolution of my feelings, and did not fail to follow the impulse which prompted her to awaken them. “Even her regard for Lord Kencarth does not exclude from her bosom the justice of admiration,” continued she; “and though her affections may be his lordship's, her friendship is still due to the virtues of Sir Sidney.”
“Unquestionably,” interrupted I; “and every sensation, which so pure a heart as Isabella's may feel, will be prompted by good sense, and sanctioned by discretion; for she is above the folly of caprice; she is too proud to court that esteem which she does not hope to render reciprocal.”
“Were you always of this opinion?” cried Lady Arabella, drawing on her glove with the acerbity of vexation.
[Page 343]
“There have been moments when I condemned Isabella's conduct, when I thought her an empty, vain coquet,” said I; “but even sollies become trivial by comparison with faults of greater magnitude; and we are induced to tolerate the errors of friendship, though we shrink with repugnance from the treacheries of love.”
“What do you call the treacheries of love?—it is a fine romantic word,” said Lady Arabella, endeavouring to laugh: “but those who are most prone to rail against treason, are frequently themselves the most atrocious traitors.”
I comprehended the oblique censure; but it failed to provoke an explanation, which I reserved for a more important crisis. Lady Arabella's conduct in Sir Sidney's chamber authorised my resolution, and I determined not to marry her, let the consequences be ever so satal. So easily may we find a pretext
[Page 344]
when we wish to violate the bonds of affection.
Another half hour had passed in that sort of conversation which, however incomprehensible to the cynical, or trivial in the opinion of the wise, was perfectly consistent with the awakened resentment of two capricious lovers; for, to confess the truth, I believed lady Arabella's attachment to me was formed on the quicksand basis of vanity, and that of the very worst kind—the vanity of universal conquest. She had arrived at an age when a lover was an indispensable appendage to fashionable notoriety; and as the duchess, her mother, did not yet think it time to relinquish the myrtle wreath in favour of her lovely epitome, the lively Arabella traversed the parterre of busy life, firmly resolved to decorate her own bosom with those trophies of conquest, which she had little hope of wresting from the brows of
[Page 345]
her maternal rival. It was a just remark of an enlightened author 15 , that one of the most perplexing situations for the female heart is that where the daughter bloomed before the mother began to fade. The many instances which we meet with in fashionable life corroborate the observation; and to this circumstance may be attributed the spirit of rivalry, which often kindles a flame to destroy those fine sensibilities which should cement the dearest of all human connections—that of child and parent. Thence it is, that we see beautiful grandmothers disputing the palm of victory with their no less lovely daughters, who, in haste to prove the folly of their parents, by becoming early mothers, in their turn lay the foundation for future hours of domestic inquietude. Such was precisely the situation of Lady Arabella; and such will be the consequences
[Page 346]
of early marriages, till Time shall take his last flight over every scene of human vicissitude.
CHAP. XCV. I began now to feel some degree of uneasiness at the absence of Isabella and Lord Kencarth. The time of night, and the impropriety of the event, no less astonished the greater part of the family. The manor-house was searched from the roof to the foundation; several persons were dispatched to explore every avenue of the grounds: others hastened to the parsonage, while I, with a mind equally a stranger to hope as to fear, set out to make inquiries at the neighbouring village.
I observed, amidst the general confusion, that Lady Arabella was provokingly
[Page 347]
serene. Mrs. Blagden had also absented herself from the manor-house, and nobody knew her motive for so doing. These circumstances, combined with Isabella's departure, puzzled and alarmed me: still I hastened towards the village, and still my heart palpitated with impatience and solicitude.
It was now past midnight. The weather had become cloudy, and a drizzling rain fell fast upon the mountains; the wind was rising, and the haze rendered every object indistinct. I traversed the park without meeting with the slightest interruption. I again passed the grotto, and the nook which had concealed the mysterious stranger:—all was quiet, and I at length reached the village. The first place I flew to was the public-house—the surest scene of intelligence in an obscure hamlet; for it is there that the wants of the little, and the follies of the great, are investigated
[Page 348]
with that freedom of speech which is the birthright of mankind, and which was once the pride of a degenerated people.
When I reached the sign of the Goat, I observed lights in most of the windows; which led to a conclusion, that the family was not yet in bed. The singularity of this circumstance, at so late an hour, inspired my breast with hopes that I should obtain some intelligence respecting the fugitives. The idea of Lord Linbourne strongly possessed my mind, and a thousand dreadful conjectures followed as rapidly as thought. I entered the lower room, where I found the servant girl whom I had seen on my last visit. She started, and became suddenly as pale as ashes. I made her a signal not to speak, by pressing my finger on my lip, and, at the same time, grasping her arm with impressive firmness. She trembled, fell upon her knees
[Page 349]
before me, and, bursting into tears, with a low voice conjured me not to betray her. “Then there is something to divulge?” said I. “Be quick, or you shall repent of your secrecy.”
She now perceived my pistol—for I had thought it prudent to arm myself; it was in my hand, which, till that moment, I had kept behind me.
“I have promised not to tell:—but ask your questions, and I will answer them by signals,” said the girl.
This species of prevarication is not uncommon with vulgar minds; and, in the present case, I was glad to avail myself of it. Time was precious:—I heard voices in the apartment up stairs, and the girl began to tremble more violently than ever.
“What persons are in the room above?” said I.
She held up two fingers.
“Two persons?”
[Page 350]
She nodded assent.
“A man and a woman?”
Again she inclined her head.
My impatience would not wait to ask another question, but, darting by her, I ascended the stairs with frantic impetuosity.
On my approaching the door the girl shrieked. I heard some person suddenly lock it, and again a low humming sound of voices convinced me that I was not mistaken. “I request to speak only five words with you,” said I. “The whole country is alarmed, and in search of you. This absurd conduct will only expose you to insult, and excite the resentment of Lady Aubrey. Be advised;—I come as a friend, as one who now sees the folly of his past perseverance, and only wishes to bid you an eternal farewel.”
I listened—but all was silent as the grave. I dared not violate the laws of
[Page 351]
propriety by forcing the door, and yet I had not resolution to depart. “Come, come,” continued I; “this is folly. Open the door only for a moment; I am determined not to leave this spot till I have seen you—only for a moment: —one word—to bid you adieu for ever.”
Rosanna, the ever predominating, the rash thought, which had so often contaminated my mind, at that instant grew terribly seductive. The pistol was loaded;—I raised my hand towards my head, when the servant girl, who had followed unseen by me, grasped my arm, and, suddenly turning the instrument of death, in the struggle, discharged it through the door of the chamber.
A loud shriek followed the explosion, and immediately after I heard the casement opened. I leaped the whole flight of stairs, and hastened to the front of
[Page 352]
the house just as a female was escaping from the window. On seeing me she drew back; the lights in the room were extinguished. I was mad with rage and disappointment, and again ascended the staircase; where I felt myself seized by the throat, while a stern voice exclaimed— “Rash Walsingham!—why continue to seek your own destruction? why wish a second time to stain my soul with blood?—Begone, your life is in my power. I am armed;—the blade now trembles in my hand with which I can annihilate you.”
“Then strike,” said I; “for, by the Eternal Powers, I never will quit this spot till I am satisfied.” He continued—
“I have not resolution to murder you. Nature clings about my heart, and bids me yet be merciful. Oh God! why, why do you seek to know me?—
[Page 353]
The fatal secret will wring your breast. Begone;—I once more conjure you to begone.”
I endeavoured to grapple with him, while I called loudly for a light. The affrighted girl had flown to alarm the village, and I had no resource but the little strength which astonishment and despair had left me.
We wrestled for some moments. My antagonist was athletic, but guilt and terror enervated his limbs, and, after a severe struggle, I overpowered him.—He fell.— “Oh God!” exclaimed he, with an agonized voice; “my own accursed knife has penetrated my breast. Fly, Walsingham;—save yourself—for I am murdered.”
I reeled down the stairs;—there was no light in the lower room, except that which was afforded by a small wood fire:—I rushed out of the house. As I passed the threshold I heard a deep groan,
[Page 354]
and faintly discerned a female stretched on the ground beneath the window. The dangers of my situation seemed to augment every moment: I would have stopped to raise the wretched sufferer, but the idea of having already committed murder bewildered me with horrors, and with tottering limbs I hurried towards the manor-house. Such an hour I had never before experienced. My whole frame was convulsed—my mind maddened; while the spacious vault of heaven that hung over me seemed as dark as the internal hell which filled my bosom. I crossed the park with my eyes almost starting from their sockets; every step seemed to tremble on eternity, and every breeze that moaned over the mountains, in fancy whispered approaching dissolution. I rushed into the portico, and, without stopping, entered the saloon where Lady Aubrey and Mr. Hanbury
[Page 355]
were waiting impatiently for my return. The lights presented an object which made humanity shudder! My face was pale,—my hair dishevelled,—my waistcoat torn open,—and my breast bathed with blood.
Lady Aubrey, concluding that I had destroyed Lord Kencarth, sunk powerless on a chair:—Mr. Hanbury, strongly impressed with horrors, had not resolution to inquire the cause of my disordered looks, and I fell into his arms, which had scarcely strength to support me.
[Page 356]
CHAP. XCVI. Before I had time to explain the dreadful event which had taken place, a messenger, out of breath with speed and terror, arrived from the village, demanding instantly to speak with Lady Aubrey. She quitted the saloon, faint and trembling. Mr. Hanbury's fears anticipated the destruction of Isabella, and the anguish of his mind was undescribable. I still leaned upon his shoulder; I attempted to speak—my lips quivered— my voice faultered—and the fruitless effort proved, more strongly than language could have done, the torture of my soul, the magnitude of my despair.
In a few moments Lady Aubrey rushed wildly into the saloon— “Save! Oh! save yourself, unhappy Walsingham!”
[Page 357]
said she, “and escape, while you have yet time. Your life will be the forfeit of your rashness,—for you have murdered Edward Blagden.”
“Murdered!” repeated Mr. Hanbury, shrinking almost to the ground. Lady Aubrey continued addressing him: “The villagers are alarmed, but they know not who has perpetrated this horrible deed. Walsingham's situation will fix the guilt on him;—entreat, O! entreat him to fly!” Then clasping my hand, she threw herself upon her knees before me.— “Alas! unhappy and neglected child of my dear dead sister, I have been the cause of all thy crimes!” said she. “For my cursed avarice has driven thee on to this last dreadful act of desperation.” She hung round me in an agony of tears. She kissed my trembling hand, and bathed it with the torrents which flowed from her wild and starting eyes.
[Page 358]
“Oh! my poor Sidney,” cried she, “what,—what will be thy destiny?”
“I will go to Edward Blagden,” said I. “A thousand lives, had I as many, and were they all at stake; should not prevent my seeing him.”
“Almighty God!” exclaimed Mr. Hanbury, raising his eyes towards Heaven, “this is an hour of tremendous retribution.”
I tore myself from Lady Aubrey's grasp;—she fell. I darted out of the room, and hastened to my chamber. After changing my clothes, I flew to the boudoir . The door was open to Sir Sidney's apartment, and I beheld Lady Arabella sitting by his pillow. Again I descended to the saloon: my aunt and Mr. Hanbury were gone to visit the dying Edward. I rushed forth like a maniac from his cell of horrors;—my limbs seemed to bear me with supernatural
[Page 359]
velocity:—I darted across the park. The first break of dawn presented to my view the surrounding ramparts of nature, whose tremendous altitude mingled with the clouds, hiding their heads, as if to shun the horrors of the world beneath. Still I pursued my course,— desperate in misfortune,—but unconscious of premeditated guilt.
When I came to the scene of blood, I rushed towards the parlour, where I beheld Lady Aubrey kneeling on the floor, like the image of despair. By her side on a mattress lay the wretched Judith, in the agonies of death. During the struggle betwixt Edward Blagden and myself, after the pistol was fired through the door, she endeavoured to escape upon a penthouse which projected beneath the window. In the attempt she fell. Almost every bone in her body was shattered by the concussion;—her arm and leg were broken,—her skull
[Page 360]
fractured, and her flesh bruised, while the agonies of a violent death wrung her heart in every fibre.
As I approached her, she smiled, with a ghastly and convulsive expression that made me shiver. “Ah!” exclaimed she, “are you come? Feast, feast your vengeance on the life-blood of your enemy. But there is yet a new pang in store for you—a deed that will curse you!” She writhed with torture, and again her countenance was terribly exulting.— “Perish, perish your hated name,” said she, again exerting all her strength to speak. “Go! look at the murdered Edward,—he who has been condemned to obscurity and shame,— while you—”—Again the anguish of her wounds arrested the curse which saultered on her tongue. I turned from the miserable wretch, and, shuddering, flew to the chamber of Edward Blagden. I opened his curtains—and—O God!
[Page 361]
Rosanna! every limb seemed petrified with horror; for, in his pale distorted features, I instantly recognized the young highwayman whom I had left, as I thought, expiring near Devizes.”
He raised his languid eyes, and feebly uttered a few incoherent words. I could only distinguish the broken sentence,— “My soul—thy hour is come,—yet nature —nature shudders!—Oh! a little —a little mercy!—one short minute, to tell the dreadful secret.” He grasped my hand, and bathed it with the cold damp of death. I knelt beside his bed: — “Generous Walsingham!” said he, “endeavour to forget this dreadful moment. I never was convinced till now; —I suspected that you were the person, by Lady Emily Delvin's letters to Lady Aubrey. The hand of fate has led you hither. I am criminal beyond the hope of mercy.” Again he shrunk upon his
[Page 362]
pillow, and groaned with contending agonies.
“Walsingham!” said he, fixing his hollow eyes on mine— “prepare!”
“For what?” said I, eagerly.
“Oh God!” continued he, “prepare his heart for this afflicting trial!”—Then turning his mournful gaze towards me, “Nothing less than self-preservation,” said he, “should have armed me against you:—my life was in your hands;—what else could have contaminated my soul, by the infernal thought of murdering— a brother?”
“A brother!”
“The same blood that now gushes from my guilty bosom, warms your aching heart. Oh, Walsingham!” continued he, “you behold in this tortured, wretched atom of human frailty,—the son—of Arthur Ainsforth.”
[Page 363]
“My father! Almighty God! is it possible?” said I, falling on his pillow, and pressing his icy hand to my feverish shrinking brain: “I now can account for all the miseries of my past life! for nature strikes conviction to my soul,— and tells me—that Mrs. Blagden—” “Is my mother.—The early victim of our fickle parent's violated promises,” interrupted the ill-sated being. “From the hour of his marriage with Penelope Waller, she vowed to seek revenge. It has been the study, the labour of her days; for when the object of her jealousy expired, her vengeance was transferred to you.”
A convulsive pang arrested the power of articulation;—again he grasped my hand. “Yet another moment—oh, agonizing Death!—another moment to confess the magnitude of crimes!—The poison, which was daily administered to Lady Aubrey, was procured by me.
[Page 364]
My affections were devoted to the daughter of the Duchess of Riversford. Want of fortune prevented the alliance, and I married to obtain that pernicious ore which has been my destruction. Had the duchess consented to our union, my soul had now been guiltless; but to procure the means of purchasing the woman of my heart, I had first recourse to the gaming-table. Then— Oh, Walsingham!—you cannot but remember my next expedient.”
Again he paused:—the agitation of his mind caused his wound to bleed incessantly. His cheek became more livid—his lip assumed a purple hue— his eyes were veiled with the film of death—and the fainting balls seemed to look with anguish through their glassy prison. With a feeble, and scarcely articulate voice, he continued— “I trust that my misguided mother will survive to expiate her crimes by penitence. In
[Page 365]
a few minutes, Walsingham, I shall close my lips in eternal silence. Dreadful moment to appear before the Omnipotent !—so charged with guilt—so trembling at his awful---”
As he spoke, a piercing shriek issued from the room beneath:—I guessed the signal to be that of death. Edward, who also heard it, endeavoured to raise himself in his bed. “Yet a moment,” said he; “one little moment, to implore forgiveness for that wretched being who is gone to render her account before the Throne of Mercy!— Pardon, pardon her, oh Heaven!”— Then, pressing my hand to his bleeding heart, he added— “Bear my contrite sigh to Lady Aubrey—tell her that, in my last moments, I entreated her to remember me with pity.”
A torturing spasm shook his frame to annihilation. He had not power to speak; but, stretching forth his arms,
[Page 366]
he fixed his dying eyes upon me, while I leant forward to receive the first— the last embrace of an expiring brother. The effort tore open his wound afresh, and he sunk upon my shoulder:—a short convulsive struggle preceded the parting groan of death, and, in another minute, he was lifeless.
CHAP. XCVII. I rushed from the chamber, and descended to the parlour. The door was shut; I hastily opened it. Lady Aubrey had been compelled to quit the scene of horror, and the only object that met my eyes was the blackening corpse of Judith Blagden. She had expired in agonies which mocked the powers of description; every feature was distorted, every limb lacerated and broken. I
[Page 367]
turned away scarcely in my senses, and was darting through the outward room when I felt my arm grasped, and beheld, in the person who detained me, the host of the Black Lion, whom I once knew by the name of honest Ned. He entreated me to hear him for a single moment:—he informed me, that, involved in peril by his kindness to Edward Blagden, he had been obliged to quit his home, and to depend upon his bounty; that he had taken the name of Apprece the better to conceal himself; that he considered me as for ever banished from Glenowen for the indiscretions of my youth, and by the strong hatred of the family.
I interrupted the narrator, by asking who were the persons that nightly traversed the vicinity of the manor-house? He informed me, that, since my return, Mr. Blagden had been concealed in his habitation, hourly expecting my departure;
[Page 368]
that he met his mother every night at the grotto, to concert plans for the purpose of driving me again into exile. He also told me, that my wretched brother had determined never to destroy me, unless assaulted, and in his own defence. This last piece of information made me shrink with horror.
The host then assured me that my person was in no danger; that he had confirmed the suspicions of the country people of Mrs. Blagden and her son's attempt to poison Lady Aubrey; that I endeavoured to secure the culprits, in order to consign them to the punishment of the laws; and that the son perished by his own hands, while the affrighted mother failed in her attempt to escape from the window.
This report, which was indeed the truth, was credited by all ranks of people; while the fatal secret, which Edward Blagden had reposed in my bosom,
[Page 369]
remained there, to agonize and sting it. I promised never to reveal what. I knew of the misguided host,—and we parted.
I now hastened back to the manorhouse, to take a last farewel of the distracted family. The sun had risen; the morning hour was calm and brilliant; but within my anguished bosom all was tempestuous darkness: the cheerful skies seemed to mock the stormy conflicts of my soul, and at that moment the wildest tumult of elemental rage would have been congenial to my senses. I loathed existence;—I began to hate my species. Could I think kindly of those who had never shewn me kindness? Could I, so goaded by perpetual inhumanity, retain one particle of feeling, which might proclaim me human? The world, to me, had been a scene of misery. I had been stung by those blind prejudices which poison society:—chilled by the scorn of empty pride,—and taunted by the perpetual
[Page 370]
menaces of poverty: what could be expected from a being whose heart was deadened by the unceasing pressure of affliction, but abhorrence and disgust? It is easy for the fastidiousness of perfecuting rigour, to deem the child of misery, whose affections are blighted, whose heart is writhing with despair, vindictive; but reason and nature will proclaim the calumny; the former will, while it blushes for the frailty of the human mind, confess its want of magic to restrain the force of indignation; and the latter will consider resentment as a part of the gross compound which forms, and the electric spirit which actuates the heart of man. There may be souls insensible to injuries, but they are also dead to the dignities of feeling.
It is impossible to describe my sensations as I contemplated the beautiful valley of Glenowen on my way to the manor-house:—that spot, where in my
[Page 371]
infant hours I had first known the sorrows of existence; where I had been taught by prejudice to place a shield before my heart, which repelled the generous attachment of the ill-fated Sidney. That spot, where the inexorable Judith first felt the gnawing pangs of jealousy, and nursed them into the hydra scorpions of revenge: where a father, forgetting the sanctity of moral precepts, yielded to the guidance of illicit passions; and—Oh! memory!—from the fevered source of thought yet spare one tear, while I repeat, where,—chilled by the cold neglect of pride and folly,—a dear mother perished! perished, as I have since learnt, through the machinations of that monster who alienated a sister's affections; and has, since that fatal moment, never ceased to persecute her devoted offspring.
On entering the manor-house I inquired after Sir Sidney; and was informed
[Page 372]
that the female servant who had been left to attend him during Lady Aubrey's absence, had told Lady Arabella, in my cousin's hearing, of all that had happened;—not without intimating that I was the murderer. To confirm her suspicions, my waistcoat, stained with blood, was produced in the chamber where the sufferer lay; the sight of it nearly deprived him of his senses, while it almost overwhelmed Lady Arabella with affliction. I hastened to the boudoir ; the door which communicated with Sir Sidney's chamber was open, but I was forbid to enter. I then flew to Lady Aubrey's dressing-room, where I found her busied in reading and arranging various written papers: she was too deeply absorbed in thought to notice my approach. There was a kind of stern and steady fortitude in her look and manner, that fixed my attention. I had been in the apartment some time, when she
[Page 373]
perceived me, or rather when she found a moment, abstracted from the deep attention of her thoughts: “Walsingham,” said she, with a sigh which seemed to labour at her heart, “this is a day of dreadful wonders. The avenging arm of destiny has annihilated your enemies; and those whom it has pleased the great Disposer of events to spare, are bound to do you justice. From the eye of Omnipotence there are no secretshidden! The crimes of hardened individuals, however they are successful for a time, will inevitably meet the tremendous blow of retribution. I am criminal, dreadfully criminal;—but I will lay open my heart, bleeding with contrition, before the tribunal of my Maker, and bow to the chastening scourge, till I have expiated my offences.”
There was an awful sorrow in her tone and gesture, that made my blood
[Page 374]
almost freeze in every vein.—After a short pause, she continued:—
“This night, the secret of the cabinet shall be unfolded. You will then know, you will explore the source of that insatiable abhorrence, which uniformly actuated the mind of Mrs. Blagden; and through her pernicious influence steeled my breast against the claims of nature and humanity. Such is the tyranny of a malignant spirit, when once entrusted with domestic secrets;—and such the misery of those wretches, whose conduct places them in the power of sordid and revengeful fiends;—who, subtle in the magic of exploring the human mind, only become acquainted with its frailties, to shackle and command all its succeeding movements.”
Her words seemed to collect all my senses, and blend them into that of hearing. I listened with an avidity that scarcely
[Page 375]
permitted me to breathe:—the circulation at my heart, by turns, beat slow and quickened, as though the fountain of vitality would burst with expectation. Lady Aubrey observed my convulsive agitation; and, after pressing her hand for a moment upon her eyes, to repel the tears that started in defiance of her fortitude, she again addressed me.
“I conjure, I entreat you to be calm,” said she; “this is not an hour for the frenzy of impetuous passions:—exhaust not the sensibility of your heart, in conflicts; nature will soon arouse your mind, to agonize and try your strength of resolution. The fate of Sidney,—the happiness of Colonel Aubrey,—your own,— will depend on the elucidation of this eventful epoch. Leave me to arrange my papers; I would not close my eyes, I would not sleep again with the torturing load which now bruises my guilty heart, to be mistress of the universe.”
[Page 376]
“Command,—and your will shall be obeyed,” said I, while I felt an awful presentiment that was undescribable.
She hesitated a few moments. Her bosom seemed to shrink with horror, while her cheek displayed a transient flush of shame.
“I request that you will leave me,” said she. “The business of this event will occupy my attention till the evening. I have committed my beloved Sidney to the care of Lady Arabella and Mr. Hanbury; and I trust that your assiduities will be united to theirs, while I perform the task which Heaven enjoins, and which must not be delayed.”
While my aunt was speaking, a servant delivered a letter from Isabella. She merely glanced at the name, and then presented it to me. I read the following lines:—
[Page 377]
“Chepstow
“In a few hours, I shall be the wife of Lord Kencarth. I have followed your counsel; and, not withstanding Walsingham's resolution to marry Lady Arabella, I yet trust and hope that Heaven will avert the blow, which would annihilate the dearest of mortals. Your resolution to unfold the mystery which has too long undermined your Sidney's repose, may restore to your breast that tranquillity, which can only be the result of conscious rectitude. Delay not a moment, I conjure you: reflect, that the happiness of one object, the prosperity of another, and the existence of a third, are events of too much importance to bear procrastination. The object of my choice, sensible of all his past indiscretions, will, I trust, by the fortune which Mr. Randolph has bequeathed to me, be enabled to enjoy those pure and rational
[Page 378]
delights which he never experienced in the vortex of dissipation. He is a repentant transgressor,—and the eye of contrition looks with hope, even to offended Heaven. Can the weakness of a mortal, then, refuse to pardon?
“When I reflect on the dreadful, the solemn oath which fear induced you to extort from Sidney, I tremble! Oh! absolve him by a confession,—a voluntary confession—snatch the beloved, the guiltless victim, from disgrace, left the grave should yawn for revenge, and death demand a sacrifice which would make nature shudder.
“Farewell, my dear Lady Aubrey. Assure the suffering Sidney of my inviolable affection, and persuade the mistaken Walsingham to accept that friendship which has ever warmed my heart, and allowed him the name—the tender name of—brother. More, I never felt;— and less, I will not offer.
[Page 379]
“I am hastening towards Bristol, where, with my brother's consent, and that of Lady Kencarth, I shall soon commence the duties of domestic attachment; and I trust, that the meek lustre of esteem will not be less grateful to a husband's feelings, because it will be heightened by the glow of fond affection.
“Once more farewel.—Say all that is proper to my brother;—every thing that is kind to the dear Sidney:—and add one more assurance of inviolable friendship to the generous, but misguided Walsingham.
“ Isabella .”
I returned the letter to Lady Aubrey, and hastened to my chamber, where I passed the remainder of the day till twilight. The variety of sorrows that divided my regrets,—the dreadful and recent events which awakened me to
[Page 380]
anguish, rendered the marriage of Isabella an affliction of less magnitude than it would have been at any other period. The fever of the mind, like that of the body, presents the greatest peril when it attacks us amidst the plenitude of enjoyment. I was woe-worn to the very acmé of despair: I had no hope, no palliating dream, to lull my senses;— they were wild with persecution, and armed, terribly armed, for the worst that could assail them.
As twilight advanced, I stole from my chamber to the boudoir . I found that Mr. Hanbury had been some time with Lady Aubrey. All was silent in Sir Sidney's apartment, and I concluded that he slept. I threw myself on a sofa, and waited in silent sorrow for his awaking. After I had passed near an hour in this still recess, with no light but that which a wood fire afforded, Lady Arabella gently opened the door of Sir Sidney's room,
[Page 381]
and requested that I would give her a phial of medicine which stood on the table. I poured it into a glass;— she received it from my hand, and Sir Sidney instantly swallowed it. Lady Arabella assured me that he was considerably tranquillized,—and again I flung myself on the sofa, to indulge my mournful ruminations, till the hour of awful disclosure. From time to time Lady Arabella stole to the door, which was a-jar, to inform me how much she thought my amiable cousin better. I had no senses but for expectation. Every nerve of thought was occupied to agony, and minutes seemed ages while they were lengthened by impatience.
[Page 382]
CHAP. XCVIII. An hour after the close of day I received a summons to attend Lady Aubrey in her dressing-room. I flew almost with the swiftness of thought, and in a moment presented myself before her. Mr. Hanbury was already there, and his countenance bore marks of profound and mournful impressions. My aunt drew her chair towards the table, which was covered with a number of writings; she made a signal for me to take my feat, and Mr. Hanbury, with emphatic solemnity, began to read the last will of the deceased Sir Edward Aubrey. I shall not trouble you, Rosanna, with the tedious forms and repetitions of the law; but merely give you a brief abstract of this important paper.
[Page 383]
At the time of Sir Edward's making his will Lady Aubrey was pregnant; he therefore bequeathed to the expected offspring, in case of its being a son, the extensive and rich domains of Glenowen, together with the manor-house, plate, furniture, pictures, and library; and the sum of sixty thousand pounds, to be paid when the said heir male should arrive at the age of twenty-one; with the farther sum of six thousand pounds per annum for the expences of the board, education, and travels of the said heir from the age of twelve to seventeen.
He also bequeathed eight thousand pounds to Walsingham Ainsforth, to be paid on his attaining the age of twenty-one: three hundred pounds per annum to be paid by Lady Aubrey for the education of the said Walsingham Ainsforth, from the age of nine years to that of seventeen.
[Page 384]
To Judith Blagden; in consideration of her services to Sir Edward's deceased mother, and her attachment to Frances Lady Aubrey, the sum of three thousand pounds: but, in case of the death of Walsingham Ainsforth, a farther sum of two thousand pounds, to be paid within one month after his decease.
In case the offspring of Lady Aubrey should be a female, the estate of Glenowen and all the appurtenances thereunto belonging, devolving on Sir Edward's brother Colonel Aubrey, he bequeathed the sum of thirty thousand pounds to the said daughter, to be paid on her attaining her eighteenth year, with three hundred pounds annually for board and education. The legacy to Walsingham Ainsforth to be twenty thousand pounds, and that to Mrs. Blagden one thousand only. The remainder, deducting Lady Aubrey's marriage-settlement of twelve hundred pounds per annum , to go with the estate
[Page 385]
to Colonel Aubrey and his heirs for ever.
I heard the will read to the last line without the smallest emotion: the petty fraud which had robbed me of the sum allowed for my education, could not awaken a sentiment of regret in a bosom so deeply wounded, or a mind so habituated to all the dreadful varieties of sorrow. Mr. Hanbury folded the paper: his hand trembled, and the paleness of death stole over Lady Aubrey's features.
“Now, Walsingham,” said she, “prepare to hear the fatal secret of my soul; prepare to execrate a wretch, whose life has been devoted to avarice and deception.”
The agitation which shook her frame, made her tongue faulter—she paused.
“Oh, madam!” said I, “do not, hesitate to unfold this momentous mystery. There is nothing material in Sir Edward's
[Page 386]
ward's will—nothing but what I can forgive, and I alone am injured.”
She struggled with the anguish of her mind, and with a desperate resolution exclaimed— “Hear, hear it then, Walsingham, and let the agonizing confession touch your heart to pity—I have no son! the wretched, the ill-fated Sidney is my daughter!”
I shrunk almost to annihilation—the powers of language failed to express the astonishment that possessed my mind.
“Yes, Walsingham,” continued Lady Aubrey, “that persecuted angel, whose romantic, whose invincible attachment to you has involved her in so many sorrows, is my daughter—the daughter of Sir Edward Aubrey.”
“Almighty God! support, sustain my soul under this new trial of its faculties!” said I. “This is, indeed, an hour of wonders! All that has passed now rushes on my memory in proof of what
[Page 387]
you have disclosed. What a fool—what a blind, thoughtless fool have I been!— How unworthily, how barbarously have I repaid this heroic attachment! Oh! let me hasten to implore forgiveness—let me, at the feet of the generous Sidney, breathe forth the anguish of compunction.”
“Tranquillize your mind,” said Mr. Hanbury, interrupting me, “and recollect that you have many moments yet to come, which will require considerable address, and no less delicacy. The amiable Sidney is not prepared for this disclosure, which has been hastened by the death of Mrs. Blagden. Bound by a solemn oath, before she quitted Switzerland, your amiable cousin engaged herself never to declare her sex during the lifetime of Lady Aubrey, without her free permission. The origin of her disguise was Mrs. Blagden's avarice, and her hatred of you as the son of her detested rival. Thus we see the dreadful
[Page 388]
effects of that treachery in our sex, which too often arms the female mind against the sensibilities of pity; while it urges the deluded victim on to every species of depravity. The amiable Sidney has been educated in masculine habits; but every affection of her heart is beautifully feminine; heroic though tender; and constant, though almost hopeless. She will, nevertheless, demand some time to fashion her manners to the graces of her sex. For your sake, Walsingham, she has endured many months of perpetual inquietude; her machinations to prevent your forming a matrimonial alliance were prompted by that passion which subdued the voice of reason, and, the fastidious will say, violated the laws of strict propriety. Yet, let it be remembered, that her virtues, her sensibility, were her own;—her crime, if the concealment of her sex can be considered criminal, was Lady Aubrey's.”
[Page 389]
My aunt now ventured a few words as a feeble extenuation of her conduct. — “I have been the dupe of an inhuman persecuting wretch,” said the, bursting into tears. “Shortly after my sister's marriage with Arthur Ainsforth, Mrs. Blagden, in confidence, revealed the story of her seduction. I heard and pitied her. The offspring of her credulity was placed at nurse as her nephew; and though I lamented my sister's alliance with your father, I still forbore to wound her bosom with the knowledge of his unworthiness. At the time of Sidney's birth, my mind was agitated by hope and fear. The extraordinary will of Sir Edward held out a strong temptation to that avarice which has ever been a prominent feature of my mind. Mrs. Blagden availed herself of this despicable passion, and suggested the idea of concealing the sex of the infant Sidney. I acquiesced; from that fatal moment I
[Page 390]
was the slave of her dominion. We travelled from place to place on the Continent, ever alarmed, and perpetually in danger of discovery. After many years had passed, the dread of Colonel Aubrey's just resentment confirmed the fatal fraud; and nothing but the death of my detested tyrant could have unveiled the mystery, or restored to happiness the suffering, devoted Sidney.”
“All-feeing Heaven!” exclaimed I, “how blind, how misguided is the human heart! All the trifling crowds of women appear as shadows of the sex, when compared with this transcendent, this unequalled Sidney. Why, why have I so long been deprived of such a pure and generous friend?”
“The name of friend is too chilling for such a bosom as your cousin's,” interrupted Mr. Hanbury. “The hour will shortly arrive when you must allow her a dearer title, or avoid her society
[Page 391]
for ever; for that affection which was sustained by hope, would, if rejected, terminate in despair. All that has passed must be buried in oblivion. Colonel Aubrey is now lord of Glenowen.— Your aunt and the amiable Sidney, if it should please Heaven to restore her, will return to Switzerland—time will, I trust, reconcile them to Colonel Aubrey.”
“Is there an act of kindness or generosity which may not be expected from Colonel Aubrey?” said I. “Can so benignant, so liberal a heart be closed against such a sufferer as the heroic Sidney? He knows how strongly she was interested in his favour—How often her heart has been agonized by the fatal secret! He has heard the innocent, the indignant child pleading at the feet of her misguided mother—pleading for him—for me—for the rectitude of her bosom—the virtues and the wrongs of her neglected uncle.”
[Page 392]
Lady Aubrey hid her face on Mr. Hanbury's arm, and shuddered.
“Spare me, Oh, Walsingham! I conjure you to spare me,” said she; “I am already tortured by compunction— Do not suppress the energies of awakened truth, by the anguish of despair. Let me, let me live to expiate my offences.”
As she spoke, Lady Arabella rushed into the room; her countenance evinced the horrors of her mind, while she scarcely, articulated— “Oh, Lady Aubrey! Sidney—the dear, dear Sidney is dying.”
“Rosanna, I must be brief or the pang that wrings my heart will arrest my pen.---Here description fails— the poignancy of anguish mocks the feeble power of words, and the hand that has traced the sorrows of my life, is convulsed with agitation. The tear, the groan of torture could no longer relieve the burning anguish of my heart. My brain seemed to shrink—my limbs
[Page 393]
to petrify—while Lady Arabella disclosed the dreadful event.
I—I had destroyed the amiable Sidney.
The drug which I had given her was laudanum—the contents of the phial which I had purchased for my own destruction, and which had been incautiously left upon the table in her boudoir . The distracted state of my mind at the moment when I delivered the pernicious potion to Lady Arabella's hand, occasioned the terrible mistake. I was hopeless —wild—distracted.
I hastened to the chamber, and, throwing myself beside her bed, pressed the dear, senseless, persecuted Sidney to my tortured bosom—Mr. Hanbury would have torn me from her; but the frenzy of my soul gave strength to every artery in my fevered frame, and I could at that moment have encountered a lion's fury.
[Page 394]
My despair at length became ungovernable. Again I snatched the dear victim of inexorable fate to my palpitating heart:—she breathed. I kissed her cold and livid cheek, and, exhausted by the agonies of my soul, fell senseless beside her.
Fearing the consequences that might await this dreadful event, Mr. Hanbury had me instantly removed to the parsonage. I was led by two domestics. The bleak blast from the mountains reanimated my senses, and awakened my aching memory to an accumulation of anguish. Oh, Rosanna! what an age of misery was comprised in that short hour! The bosom of Nature trembled at the violation of her laws. The wind seemed to rock the stupendous mountains, while my tortured groans were lost amidst its howlings.
At day-break a chaise was procured, and I, in compliance with Mr. Hanbury's
[Page 395]
entreaties, set out with the faithful Andrew for London. On my arrival, I repaired to my friend Mr. Optic, in whose sympathizing breast I confided the fatal secret. After conjuring him to take charge of my affairs,—to secure an annuity of three hundred pounds on old Andrew, and one of the same sum on Griffith Blagden, I departed for Dover. A packet-boat was ready to fail for Oftend. I embarked. I committed myself to the precarious element, a hopeless, lost, sorlorn, despairing exile!
Such, Rosanna, such is the distracted mortal whom your gentle nature pities; the being who, while his hand concludes the dreadful detail of unexampled sorrows, looks forward with a mournful smile of resignation to that grave which opens to receive him: for, to these eyes, the sun may rise and set, and rise again, without displaying one animated prospect,
[Page 396]
one spot on this vast globe, which is not overshadowed by despair.
I go—benignant child of pity, to that dark and silent home, where my wasting withering heart will find repose which this unfeeling world denied it. Remember, amiable Rosanna, remember the victim of deception—the ill-fated— the persecuted Walsingham!—and, Oh! mild and soothing spirit of benevolence! when you again peruse my melancholy story, let pity draw a veil over the darkest shades, and let the softer tints be, for once, irradiated by the unsullied tear of sacred sympathy.
WALSINGHAM to ROSANNA. Luxemburg, March 22, 1792 .
“I depart this instant for Switzerland. Ah, Rosanna! Sidney Aubrey lives! The poison of the pernicious drug was counteracted, and I fly—to
[Page 397]
expiate my crime—to idolize her virtues.
“Farewel, sweet and enlightened friend!—soother of pain—and monitress of reason—farewel. I am, wild with the agony of joy:—it is an inexplicable sensation: —the soul which is not finely organized can never know it. Ah, Rosanna! may you never experience those sorrows, the reverse of which, alone, can draw it into action.
“Farewel; once more farewel.
“W. A.”
The Same to the Same . Glenowen, August 27, 1792.
“This day has overpaid me ten-fold for all the anguish I have hitherto experienced. The stormy scene, I trust, is past for ever; and the brightening prospect at length sooths my mind, almost exhausted by perpetual persecution. The
[Page 398]
prejudices of early infancy, originating in the most barbarous deception, are completely counteracted by the virtues, the heroic virtues of my transcendent Sidney! Indeed, so completely is she changed, so purely gentle, so feminine in manners; while her mind still retains the energy of that richly-treasured dignity of feeling which are the effects of a masculine education, that I do not lament past sorrows, while my heart triumphs, nobly triumphs in the felicity of present moments.
“Colonel Aubrey, soon after my departure from Glenowen, surrendered himself on the charge of Lord Linbourne's death, and was acquitted by the laws of equity and honour. He has sanctioned my alliance with the amiable Sidney:—he has received with open arms the offending Lady Aubrey,—and he has blest her children with the affection of a father.
[Page 399]
“My worthy friend Mr. Optic, whose genuine excellence of heart is almost unexampled, on the embarrassment of Lord Kencarth's finances, sheltered and supported the venerable Griffith, till the annuity which I requested him to purchase could be completely secured. The good old sailor is now, unconscious of his daughter's criminality, settled in Glamorganshire. The fortune which Mrs. Blagden left, has, by Colonel Aubrey's commands, been distributed among her indigent relations. Is not this the perfection of philanthropy? Does it not prove the generosity of that noble disinterested nature, which has uniformly characterised the most liberal of mortals?
“Lady Arabella is become the sober wife of Walter Hanbury; and the honest Andrew is as great “a laird as ony o'his clan, in the Highlands of Scotland.”
[Page 400]
You must remember that, in my opinion, greatness consists in virtue !
“This letter will be delivered to you by the Duchess of Heartwing, who, abandoned by her dissipated lord, retires on a separate maintenance of six hundred pounds per annum to her native country, after passing a few weeks at Spa for the benefit of the waters. Mr. Optic, with my friend Kencarth, and his amiable Isabella, are here, to witness my felicity:—the viscount, a repentant rover, and his gentle amiable monitress, the happy origin of a reformation which graces her power, and evinces his understanding,
“Now, Rosanna, retired from the busy varying scenes of noise and folly, I leave those trifling vicious reptiles whom you have met with during the progress of my disastrous story, to the infamy that will mark their names, till fate consigns them
[Page 401]
to oblivion. I have held them up as beacons, to warn the unwary: I have portrayed them, as they are; neither with a flattering nor a distorting pencil. If they continue to triumph over the children of worth and genius, it will only prove that, in this undefinable sphere, where the best and wisest cannot hope for happiness, the demons of art are permitted to oppress with wrongs, while they lift the empty brow of arrogance and pride above the illustrious pupils of genius, Truth , and nature !
“Amiable Rosanna! benign and gentle patroness of sorrow and of virtue! whose example cheers the good, and whose pity sooths the unhappy, accept my grateful friendship,—and farewel.
“ Walsingham Ainsforth .”
THE END.
NOTES
1 Lettre d'Heloise et d' Abeilard. “Yet write, oh write me all,”& Pope.
2 The miseries of that noble and useful animal the horse have frequently excited the pity of humane and thinking minds; but no one has more pathetically described its sufferings than Mr. Pratt, in his charming volumes of “Gleanings.”
3 Chatterton.
4 [1] Bollingbroke
5 Shakespeare.
6 “La philosophie triomphe aisément des maux passés, et des maux à venir; mais les maux présens triomphent d'elle.”—Rochefoucault.
7 The poet.
8 Half a roulcau, or twenty-five guineas.
9 Werther, Seconde Partie.
10 True Anecdotes.
11 Sicilian Lover.
12 “Il n'y a que d une sorte d'amour; mais il y en a mille differentes copies.” Rochefqucauld.
13 Melmoth's Translation of Cicero's Lælius.
14 Seneca.
15 Doctor Johnson.
$$$
