Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



f\l~Jtll2.JL^3 



w 




HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



V 



y 



WATCH AND WAED. 



BY 



/' 



HENRY JAMES Jr. 




BOSTON: 
HOUGHTON, OSGOOD AND COMPANY. 

1878. 



s>. 










* < V 



COPTBIOHT, 1878. 
Bt henry JAMES Jx. 

AU rights reserved. 



.1 \ 



6-' 






<^ 



University Press: Welch, Bigblow, & Ca, 
Cambridge. 



r 



NOTE. 

'^ Watch and Ward^' first appeared in the 
Atlantic Monthly in the year 1871. It has 
now been minutely revised, and has received 
many verbal alterations. 

April, 1878. 




WATCH AND WARD. 



■«o»- 




I. 

lOGER LAWRENCE had come to town for the 
express purpose of doing a certain act, hut as the 
hour for action approached he felt his ardor rap- 
idly ehbing. Of the ardor that comes from hope, indeed, 
he had felt little from the first ; so little that as he whirled 
along in the train he wondered to find himself engaged 
in this fool's errand. But in default of hope he was 
sustained, I may almost say, by despair. He should fail, 
he was sure, but he must fail again before he could rest. 
Meanwhile he was restless enough. In the evening, at 
his hotel, having roamed aimlessly about the streets for a 
couple of hours in the dark December cold, he went up 
to his room and dressed, with a painful sense of having 
but partly succeeded in giving himself the figure of an 
impassioned suitor. He was twenty -nine years old, sound 
and strong, with a tender heart, and a genius, almost, 
for common-sense ; his face told clearly of youth and 
kindness and sanity, but it had little other beauty. His 



6 WATCH AND WAED. 

complexion was so fresh as to be almost absard in a man 
of his age, — an efiFect rather enhanced by a too early 
baldness. Being extremely short-sighted^ he went with 
his head thrust forward ; but as this infirmity is con- 
sidered by persons who have studied the picturesque to 
impart an air of distiuction^ he may have the benefit of the 
possibility. His figure was compact and sturdy, and, on 
the whole, his best point ; although, owing to an incurable 
personal shyness, he had a good deal of awkwardness of 
movement. He was fastidiously neat in his person, and 
extremely precise and methodical in his habits, which were 
of the sort suppose(^to mark a man for bachelorhood. 
The desire to get the better of his diflfidence had given 
him a certain formalism of manner which many persons 
found extremely amusing. He was remarkable for the 
spotlessness of his linen, the higli polish of his boots, 
and the smoothness of his hat. He carried in all weath- 
ers a peculiarly neat umbrella. He never smoked; lie 
drank in moderation. His voice, instead of being the^ 
robust barytone which his capacious chest led you to ex- 
pect, was a mild, deferential tenor. He was fond of going 
early to bed, and was suspected of what is called " fussing " 
with his health. No one had ever accused him of mean- 
ness, yet he passed universally for a cunning economist. 
In trifling matters, such as the choice of a shoemaker or 
a dentist, his word carried weight ; but no one dreamed 
of asking his opinion on politics or literature. Here and 
there, nevertheless, an observer less superficial than the 
majority would have whispered you that Roger was an 
undervalued man, and that in the long run he would come 
out even with the best. **Have you ever studied his 



WATCH AND WARD. 7 

face ? " such an observer would s9j. Beneath its simple 
serenity, over which his ruddj blushes seemed to pass 
like clouds in a summer skj, there slumbered a fund of 
exquisite human expression. The eye was excellent; 
small, perhaps, and somewhat dull, but with a certain ap- 
pealing depth, like the tender dumbness in the gaze of a 
dog. In repose Lawrence may have looked stupid ; but 
as he talked his face slowly brightened by gradual fine 
degrees, until at the end of an hour it inspired you with 
a confidence so perfect as to be in some degree a tribute 
to its owner's intellect, as it certainly was to his integrity. 
On this occasion Roger dressed himself with unusual care 
and with a certain sober elegance. He debated for three 
minutes over two cravats, and then, blushing in his mirror 
at his puerile vanity, he reassumed the plain black tie in 
which he had travelled. When he had finished dressing 
it was still too early to go forth on his errand. He went 
into the reading-room of the hotel, but here soon ap* 
peared two smokers. Wishing not to be infected by 
their fumes, be crossed over to the great empty drawing- 
room, sat down, and beguiled his impatience with trying 
on a pair of lavender gloves. 

While he was so engaged there came into the room a 
peraon who attracted his attention by the singularity of 
his conduct. This was a man of less than middle age, 
good-looking, pale, with a pretentious, pointed mustaclie 
and various shabby remnants of finery. His face was 
haggai*d, his whole aspect was that of grim and hopeless 
misery. He walked straight to the table in the centre 
of the room, and poured out and drank without stopping 
three full glasses of ice- water, as if he were striving to 



8 WATCH AND WARD. 

quench some fever in his vitals. He then went to the 
window, leaned his forehead against the cold pane, and 
drummed a nervous tattoo with his long stiff finger-nails. 
Finally he strode over to the fireplace, flung himself into 
a chair, leaned forward with his head in his hands, and 
groaned audibly. Lawrence, as he smoothed down his 
lavender gloves, watched him and reflected. " What an 
image of fallen prosperity, of degradation and despair! 
I have been fancying myself in trouble ; I have been 
dejected, doubtful, anxious. I am hopeless. But what 
is my sentimental sorrow to this ? " The unhappy gen- 
tleman rose from his chair, turned his back to the chim- 
ney-piece, and stood with folded arms gazing at Law- 
rence, who was seated opposite to him. The young man 
sustained his glance, but with sensible discomfort. His 
face was as white as ashes, his eyes were as lurid as 
coals. Roger had never seen anything so tragic as the 
two long harsh lines which descended from his nose, be- 
side his mouth, in seeming mockery of his foppish, re- 
laxed mustache. Lawrence felt that his companion was 
going to address him ; he began to draw off his gloves. 
The stranger suddenly came towards him, stopped a 
moment, eyed him again with insolent intensity, and 
then seated himself on the sofa beside him. His first 
movement was to seize the young man's arm. " He is 
simply crazy ! " thought Lawrence. Roger was now able 
to appreciate the pathetic disrepair of his appearance. 
His open waistcoat displayed a soiled and crumpled 
shirt-bosom, from whose empty buttonholes the studs 
had recently been wrenched. In his normal freshness 
he must have looked like a gambler with a run of luck. 



WATCH AND WAHD. 9 

He spoke in a rapid, excited tone, with a hard, petulant 
voice. 

** You '11 think me crazy, I suppose. Well, I shall be 
soon. Will you lend me a hundred dollars ? " 

"Who are you? What is your trouble?" Roger 
asked. 

" My name would tell you nothing. I 'm a stranger 
here. My trouble, — it 's a long story ! '^But it 's grievous, 
I assure you. It 's pressing upon me with a fierceness 
that grows while I sit here talking to you. A hundred 
dollars would stave it off, — a few days at least. Don't 
refuse me ! " Tliese last words were uttered half as an 
entreaty, half as a threat. " Don't say you have n't got 
them, — a man that wears such pretty gloves ! Come ; 
you loojt like a good fellow. Look at me ! I 'm a good 
fellow, too. I don't need to swear to my being in dis- 
tress.'* 

Lawrence was touched, disgusted, and irritated. The 
man's distress was real enough, but there was something 
horribly disreputable in his manner. Roger declined to 
entertain his request without learning more about him. 
Prom the stranger's persistent reluctance to do more 
than simply declare that he was from St. Louis, and re- 
peat that he was in a tight place, in a d d tight place, 

Lawrence was led to believe that he had been dabbling 
in crime. The more he insisted upon some definite 
statement of his circumstances, the more fierce and per- 
emptory became the other's petition. Lawrence was 
before all things deliberate and perspicacious ; the last 
man in the world to be hustled and bullied. It was 
quite out of his nature to do a thing without distinctly 



10 WATCH AND WARD. 

knowing why. He of course had no imagination, which, 
as we know, should always stand at the right hand of 
charity ; but he had good store of that wholesome dis- 
cretion whose place is at the left. Discretion told him 
that his companion was a dissolute scoundrel, who had 
sinned through grievous temptation, perhaps, but who 
had certainly sinned. His misery was palpable, bat 
Roger felt that he could not patch up his misery without 
in some degree condoning his vices. It was not in his 
power, at any rate, to present him, out of hand, a hundred 
dollars. He compromised. "I can't think of giving 
you the sum you ask," he said. " I have no time, more- 
over, to investigate your case at present. If you will 
meet me here to-morrow morning, I will listen to any- 
thing you shall have made up your mind to say. Mean- 
while, here are ten dollars." 

The man looked at the proffered note and made no 
movement to accept it. Then raising his eyes to Roger's 
face, — eyes streaming with tears of helpless rage and 
baffled want, — " O, the devil ! " he cried. " What can I 

do with ten dollars ? D ^n it, I don't know how to 

beg. Listen to me I If you don't give me what I ask, 
I shall cut my throat 1 Think of that. On your head be 
the penalty I " 

Lawrence pocketed his note and rose to his feet. " No, 
decidedly," he said, " you don't know how to beg ! " A 
moment after, he had left the hotel and was walking 
rapidly toward a well-remembered dwelling. He was 
shocked and discomposed by this brutal collision with 
want and vice ; but as he walked, the- cool night-air sug- 
gested sweeter things. The image of his heated peti- 



/ 



WATCH AND WARD. 11 

tioner was speedily replaced by the calmer figure of 
Isabel Morton. 

He had come to know Isabel Morton three years before, 
through a visit she had then made to one of his neigh- 
bors in the country. In spite of his unventurous tastes 
and the even tenor of his habits, Lawrence was by no 
means lacking, as regards life, in what the Trench call les 
grandes curiosites ; but from an early age his curiosity 
had chiefly taken the form of a timid but strenuous desire 
to fathom the depths of matrimony. He had dreamed 
of this gentle bondage as other men dream of the ** free 
unhoused condition " of celibacy. He had been born a 
marrying man, with a conscious desire for progeny. The 
world in this respect had not done him justice. It had 
supposed him to be wrapped up in his petty comforts : 
whereas, in fact, he was serving a devout apprenticeship to 
the profession of husband and father. Feeling at twenty- 
six that he had something to offer a woman, he allowed 
himself io become interested in Miss Morton. It was 
rather odd that a man of tremors and blushes sVuld in 
this line have been signally bold ; for Miss Morton had 
the reputation of being extremely fastidious, and was 
supposed to wear some dozen broken hearts on her girdle, 
as an Indian wears the scalps of his enemies. 

It is said that, as a rule, men fall in love, with their 
opposites ; certainly Lawrence's mistress was not fash- 
ioned in his own image. He was the most unobtrusively 
natural of men; she, on the other hand, was pre-emi- 
nently artificial. She was pretty, but not really so pretty 
as she seemed ; clever, but not iiitelligent ; amiable, but 
not sympathetic. She possessed in perfection the manner 



12 WATCH AND WARD. 

of society, which she lavished with indiscriminate grace on 
the just and the unjust, and which very effectively rounded 
and completed the somewhat meagre outline of her per- 
sonal character. In reality. Miss Morton was keenly 
ambitious. A woman of simpler needs, she might very 
well have accepted our hero. He offered himself with 
urgent and obstinate warmth. She esteemed him more 
than any man she had known, — so she told him ; but 
she added that the man she married must satisfy her 
heart. Her heart, she did not add, was bent upon a car- 
riage and diamonds. • 

From the point of view of ambition, a match with 
Roger Lawrence was not worth discussing. He was 
therefore dismissed with gracious but inexorable firm- 
ness. From this moment the young man's sentiment 
hardened into a passion. Six months later he heard 
that Miss Morton was preparing to go to Europe. He 
sought her out before her departure, urged his suit 
afresh, and lost it a second time. But his passion had 
cost t^ much to be flung away unused. During her 
residence abroad he wrote her three letters, only one of 
which she briefly answered, in terms which amounted 
to little more than this : " Dear Mr. Lawrence, do leave 
me alone ! " At the end of two years she returned, and 
was now visiting her married brother. Lawrence had 
just heard of her arrival, and had come to town to make, 
as we have said, a supreme appeal. 

Her brother and his wife were out for the evening ; 
Roger found her in the drawing-room, under the lamp, 
teaching a stitch in crochet to her niece, a little girl of 
ten, who stood leaning at her side. She seemed to him 



WATCH AND WAKD. 13 

prettier than before ; althougb, in fact, sbe looked older 
and stouter. Her prettiness, for the most part, however, 
"was a matter of coquetry ; and naturally, as youth de- 
parted, coquetry filled the vacancy. Sbe was fair and 
plump, and she bad a very pretty trick of suddenly turn- 
ing her head and showing a charming white throat and 
ear. Above her well-filled corsage these objects pro- 
duced a most agreeable effect. She always dressed in 
light colors, but with unerring taste. Charming as she 
may have been, there was, nevertheless, about her so 
marked a want of the natural, that, to admire her par- 
ticularly, it was necessary to be, like Roger, in love 
with her. She received him with such flattering friend- 
liness and so little apparent suspicion of his purpose, 
that he almost took heart and hope. If she did not fear 
a declaration, perhaps she desired one. Tor the first 
half-hour Roger's attack hung fire. Isabel talked to 
better purpose than before she went abroad, and for the 
moment he sat tongue-tied for very modesty. Miss Mor- 
ton's little niece was a very pretty child ; her hair was 
combed out into a golden cloud, which covered her Slop- 
ing shoulders. She kept her place beside her aunt, 
clasping one of the latter's hands, and staring at Law- 
rence with that sweet curiosity of little girls. There 
glimmered mistily in the young man's brain a vision of a 
home-scene in the future, — a lamp-lit parlor on a winter 
night, a placid wife and mother wreathed in household 
smiles, a golden-haired child, and, in the midst, his sen- 
tient self, drunk with possession and gratitude. As the 
clock struck nine the little girl was sent to bed, having 
been kissed by her aunt and rekissed — or unkissed shall 



14 WATCH AND WAKD. 

I say ? — by lier aunt's lover. When she had disappeared^ 
Koger proceeded to business. He had proposed so 
often to Miss Morton, that, actually, practice had begun 
to tell. It took but a few moments to make his mean- 
ing plain. Miss Morton addressed herself to her niece's 
tapestry, and, as her lover went on with manly eloquence, 
glanced up at him from her work with feminine keenness. 
He spoke of his persistent love, of his long waiting and 
his passionate hope. Her acceptance of his hand was 
the only thing that could make him happy. He should 
never love another woman; if she now refused him, it 
was the end of all things ; he should continue to exist, 
to work and act, to eat and sleep, but be should have 
ceased to live. 

*' In Heaven's name," he said, *' don't answer me as 
you have answered me before." 

She folded her hands, and with a serious smile, "I 
shall not, altogether," she said. " When I have refused 
you before, I have simply told you that I could not love 
you. I cannot love you, Mr. Lawrence ! I must re- 
peat It again to-night, but with a better reason than 
before. I love another man; I am engaged." 

Roger rose to his feet like a man who has received 
a heavy blow and springs forward in self-defence. But 
he was indefensible, his assailant inattackable. He sat 
down again and hung his head. Miss Morton came to 
him and took his hand and demanded of him, as a right, 
that he should be resigned. ** Beyond a certain point," 
she said, "you have no right to thrust your regrets upon 
me. The injury I do you in refusing you is less than 
that I should do you in accepting you without love." 



WATCH AND WARD. 15 

He looked at her with his eyes full of tears. " Well ! 
I shall never marry," he said. " There is something you 
cannot refuse me. Though I shall never possess you, I 
may at least espouse your memory and live in intimate 
union with you image. I shall live with my eyes fixed 
upon it." She smiled at this fine talk ; she had heard 
so much in her day ! He had fancied himself prepared 
for the worst, but as lie walked hack to his hotel, it 
seemed intolerably bitter. Its bitterness, however, 
quickened his temper, and prompted a violent reaction. 
He would now, he declared, cast his lot with pure rea- 
son. He had tried love and faith, but they would none 
of him. He had made a woman a goddess, and she had 
made him a fool. He would henceforth care neither for 
woman nor man, but simply for comfort, and, if need 
should be, for pleasure. Beneath this gathered gust of 
cynicism the future lay as hard and narrow as the silent 
street before him. He was absurdly unconscious that 
good-humor was lurking round the very next comer. 

It was not till near morning that he was able to sleep. 
His sleep, however, had lasted less than an hour when 
it was interrupted by a loud noise from the adjoining 
room. He started up in bed, lending his ear to the 
stillness. The sound was immediately repeated ; it was 
that of a pistol-shot. This second report was fol- 
lowed by a loud, shrill cry. Roger jumped out of 
bed, thrust himself into his trousers, quitted his room, 
and ran to the neighboring door. It opened without 
difficulty, and revealed an astonisliing scene. In the 
middle of the floor lay a man, in his trousers and shirt, 
bis head bathed in blood, his hand grasping the pistol 



16 WATCH AND WARD. 

from which he had just sent a hullet through his brain. 
Beside him stood a little girl in her nightdress, her long 
hair on her shoulders, shrieking and wringing her hands. 
Stooping over the prostrate body, Roger recognized, in 
spite of his bedabbled visage, the person who had ad- 
dressed him in the parlor of the hotel. He had kept the 
spirit, if not the letter, of his menace. " O father, fa- 
ther, father ! " sobbed the little girl. Roger, overcome 
with horror and pity, stooped towards her and opened 
his arms. She, conscious of nothing but the presence 
of liuman help, rushed into his embrace and buried her 
head in his grasp. 

The rest of the house was immediately aroused, and 
the room invaded by a body of lodgers and servants. 
Soon followed a couple of policemen, and finally the pro- 
prietor in person. The fact of suicide was so apparent 
that Roger's presence was easily explained. From the 
child nothing but sobs could be obtained. After a vast 
amount of talking and pushing and staring, after a phy- 
sician had affirmed that the stranger was dead, and the 
ladies had passed the child from hand to hand through 
a bewildering circle of caresses and questions, the mul- 
titude dispersed, and the little girl was borne away in 
triumph by the proprietor's wife, further investigation 
being appointed for the morrow. For Roger, seemingly, 
this was to have been a night of sensations. There 
came to him, as it wore away, a cruel sense of his own 
accidental part in his neighbor's tragedy. His refusal 
to help the poor man had brought on the catastrophe. 
The idea haunted him awhile ; but at last, with an effort, 
he dismissed it. The next man, he assured himself, would 



WATCH AND WARD. 17 

have done no more than be ; miglit possibly bave done 
less. He felt, however, a certain indefeasible fellowship 
in the sorrow of the little girl. He lost no time, the 
next morning, in calling on the wife of the proprietor. 
She was a kindly woman enough, but so thoroughly the 
mistress of a public house that she seemed to deal out her 
Tcry pity over a bar. She exhibited toward her protegee 
a bard, business-like charity which foreshadowed vividly 
to Roger's mind the poor child's probable portion in life, 
and repeated to bim the little creature's story, as she 
bad been able to learn it. The father had come in early 
in the evening, in great trouble and excitement, and had- 
made her go to bed. He had kissed her and cried over 
ber, and, of course, made her cry. Late at night she 
was aroused by feeling him again at her bedside, kissing 
ber, fondhng her, raving over her. He bade her good 
night and passed into the adjoining room, where she heard 
Lim fiercely knocking about. She was very much fright- 
ened; she fancied he was out of his mind. She knew 
that their troubles had lately been thickening fast ; now 
the worst had come. Suddenly he called her. She asked 
what he wanted, and he bade her get out of bed and 
come to him. She trembled, but she obeyed. On reach- 
ing the threshold of his room she saw the gas turned low, 
and her father standing in his shirt against the door at 
the other end. He ordered her to stop where she was. 
Suddenly she heard a loud report and felt beside her cheek 
the wind of a bullet. He had aimed at her with a pistol. 
She retreated in terror to her own bedside and buried her 
head in the clothes. This, however, did not prevent her 
from bearing a second report, followed by a deep groan. 



18 WATCH AND WARD. 

Yentoring back again, she found ber fatber on tbe floor, 
bleeding finom the face. " He meant to kill ber, of course," 
said the landlady, " that she might n't be left alone in the 
^, world. It's a wonderful mixture of cruelty and kind- 
ness ! " 

It seemed to Roger an altogether pitiful tale. He re- 
lated his own interview with the deceased, and the latter's 
menace of suicide. " It gives me," he said, " a sickening 
sense of connection with this bloodshed. But bow could 
I help it P All the same, I wish he had taken my ten 
dollars." 

Of the antecedent history of the dead man they could 
learn little. The child had recognized Lawrence, and had 
broken out again into a quivering convulsion of tears. 
Little by little, from among her sobs, they gathered a few 
facts. Her father had brought her during the preceding 
month from St. Louis ; they had stopped some time in 
New York. Her father had been for months in great 
want of money. They had once had money enough ; she 
could not say what had become of it. Her mother had 
died many months before ; she had no other kindred nor 
friends. Her father mav have had friends, but she never 
saw them. She could indicate no source of possible as- 
sistance or sympathy. Roger put the poor little fragments 
of her story together. The most salient fact among them 
all was her absolute .destitution. 

" Well, sir," said the proprietress, " living customers are 
better than dead ones; I must go about my business. 
Perhaps you can learn something more." The little girl 
sat on the sofa with a pale face and swollen eyes, and, 
with a stupefied, helpless stare, watched her friend depart. 



WATCH AND WAKD. 19 

She was by no means a pretty child. Her clear auburn 
hair was thrust carelessly into a net with broken meshes, 
and her limbs encased in a suit of rusty, scanty mourning. 
In her appearance, in spite of her childish innocence and 
grief, there was something undeniably vulgar. "She 
looks as if she belonged to a circus troupe," Hoger said 
to himself. Her face, however, though without beauty, 
was not without interest. Her forehead was symmetrical 
and her mouth expressive. Her eyes were light in color, 
yet by no means colorless. A sort of arrested, concen- 
trated brightness, a soft introversion of their rays, gave 
them a remarkable depth. "Poor little betrayed, uu- 
friended mortal ! " thought the young man. 

" What is your name ? " he asked. 

" Nora Lambert," said the child. 

" How old are you ? " 

" Twelve." 

" And you live in St. Louis P " 

•' We used to live tliere. I was bom there." 

" Why had your father come to the East ? " 

" To make money." 

" Where was he going to live ? " 

"Anywhere he could find business." 

" What was his business ? " 

" He had none. He wanted to find some." 

" You have no friends nor relations ? " 

The child gazed a few moments in silence. " He told 
me when he woke me up and kissed me, last night, that 
I had not a friend in the world nor a person that cared 
for me." 

Before the exquisite sadness of this statement Lawrence 



20 WATCH AND WARD. 

was silent. He leaned back in his chair and looked at 
the child, — the little forlorn, precocious, potential wo- 
man. His own sense of recent bereavement rose power- 
ful in his heart and seemed to respond to hers. " Nora," 
he said, " come here." 

She stared a moment, without moving, and then left 
the sofa and came slowly towards him. She was tall for 
her years. She laid her hand on the arm of his chair and 
he took it. " You have seen me before," he said. She 
nodded. "Do you remember my taking you last night 
in my arms ? " It was his fancy that, for an answer, 
slie faintly blushed. He laid his hand on her head and 
smoothed away her thick disordered hair. She submitted 
to his consoling touch with a plaintive docility. He put 
his arm round her waist. An irresistible sense of her 
childish sweetness, of her tender feminine promise, stole 
softly into his pulses. A dozen caressing questions rose 
to his lips. Had she been to school ? Could she read 
and write P Was she musical P She murmured her an- 
swers with gathering coufidence. She had never been to 
school ; but her mother had taught her to read and write 
a little, and to play a little. She said, almost with a 
smile, that she was very backward. Lawrence felt the 
tears rising to his eyes ; he felt in his heart the tumult of 
a new emotion. Was it the inexpugnable instinct of pa- 
ternity P Was it the restless ghost of Iiis buried hope P 
He thought of his angry vow the night before to live only 
for himself and turn the key on his heart. "Prom the lips 
of babes and sucklings .... " — he softly mused. Be- 
fore twenty-four hours had elapsed a child's fingers were 
fumbling with the key. He felt deliciously contradicted; 



WATCH AND WARD. 21 

lie was after all but a lame egotist. Was he to believe, 
then, that he could not live without love, and that he 
must take it where he found it P His promise to Miss 
Morton seemed still to vibrate in his heart. But there 
was love and love ! He could be a protector, a father, a 
brother. What was the child before him but a tragic 
embodiment of the misery of isolation, a warning from 
his own blank future ? " God forbid ! " he cried. And 
as he did so, he drew her towards him and kissed her. 

At this moment the landlord appeared with a scrap of 
paper, which he had found in the room of the deceased ; 
it being the only object which gave a clew to his circum- 
stances. He had evidently burned a mass of papers just 
before his death, as the grate was filled with fresh ashes. 
Roger read the note, which was scrawled in a hurried, 
vehement hand, and ran as follows : — 

" This is to say tliat I must — I must — I must I Starv- 
ing, without a friend in the world, and a reputation worse 
than worthless, — what can I do ? Life 's impossible. 
Try it yourself. As regards my daughter, — anything, 
everything is cruel ; but this is the shortest way." 

" She has had to take the longest, after all," said the 
proprietor, sotto voce, with a kindly wink at Roger. The 
landlady soon reappeared with one of the ladies who had 
been present oveniight, — a little pushing, patronizing 
woman, who seemed strangely familiar with the various 
devices of applied charity. " I have come to arrange," 
she said, " about our subscription for the little one. I 
shall not be able to contribute myself, but I will go 
round among the other ladies with a paper. I have just 
been seeing the reporter of the * Univei-se ' ; he is to in- 



22 WATCH AND WARD. 

sert a kind of ' appeal/ yon know, in lus account of the 
affair. Perhaps this gentleman will draw ap our paper ? 
And I think it will be a beautiful idea to take the child 
with me." 

Lawrence was sickened. The world's tenderness had 
fairly begun. Nora gazed at her energetic benefactress, 
and then, with her eyes, appealed mutely to Roger. Her 
glance, somehow, moved him to the soul. Poor little 
disfathered daughter, — poor little uprooted germ of 
womanhood ! Her innocent eyes seemed to more than 
beseech, — to admonish almost, and command. Should 
he speak and rescue her ? Should he subscribe the whole 
sum, in the name of human charity ? He thought of the 
risk. She was an unknown quantity. Her nature, her 
heritage, her good and bad possibilities, were an unsolved 
problem. Her father had been an adventurer ; what had 
her mother been? Conjecture was useless; she was a 
vague spot of light on a dark background. He was 
unable even to decide whether, after all, she was plain. 

" If you want to take her round with you," said the 
landlady to her companion, ** I had better just sponge off 
her face." 

" No indeed ! " cried the other, " she is much better 
as she is. If I could only have her little nightgown 
with the blood on it ! Are you sure the bullet did n't 
strike your dress, deary P I am sure we can easily get 
fifty names at five dollars apiece. Two hundred and fifty 
dollars. Perhaps this gentleman will make it three hun- 
dred. Come, sir, now ! " 

Thus adjured, Roger turned to the child. " Nora," 
he said, " you know you are quite alone. You have no 



WATCH AND WARD. 



23 



home." Her lips trembled, but her eyes were fixed aud 
fascinated. " Do you think you could love me P " She 
flushed to the tender roots of her tumbled hair. " Will 
you come and try ? " Her range of expression of course 
was limited ; she could only answer by another burst of 
tears. 




II 




HA YE adopted a little girl, you know," Roger 
said, after this, to a number of bis friends ; but he 
felt, rather, as if slie had adopted him. He found 
it somewhat difficult to make his terms with the sense of 
actual paternity. It was indeed an immense satisfaction 
to feel, as time went on, that there was small danger of 
bis repenting of his bargain. It seemed to him more and 
more that he had obeyed a divine voice ; though indeed he 
was equally conscious that there was something comical in 
a sleek young bachelor turning nurse and governess. But 
for all this he found himself able to look the world squarely 
in the face. At first it had been with an effort, a blush, 
and a deprecating smile that he spoke of his pious ven- 
ture ; but very soon he began to take a robust satisfaction 
in alluding to it freely. There was but one man of whose 
jocular verdict lie thought with some annoyance, — his 
cousin Hubert Lawrence, namely, who was so terribly 
clever and trenchant, and who bad been through life a 
commentator formidable to his modesty, though, in the end, 
always absolved by his good-nature. But he made up his 
mind that, though Hubert might laugh, he himself was se- 
rious ; and to prove it equally to himself and his friends, 



WATCH AND WARD. 25 

he determined on a great move. He withdrew altogether 
from his profession, and prepared to occupy his house in 
the country. The latter was immediately transformed 
into a home for Nora, — a home admirably fitted to be- 
come the starting-point of a happy life. Roger's dwell- 
ing stood in the midst of certain paternal acres, — a 
little less than a " place," a little more than a farm ; deep 
in the country, and yet at two hours' journey from 
town. Of recent years a dusty disorder had fallen upon 
the house, telling of its master's long absences and his 
rare and restless visits. It was but half lived in. But 
beneath this pulverous deposit the rigid household gods 
of a former generation stand erect on their pedestals. As 
Nora grew older, she came to love her new home with an 
aliuost passionate fondness, and to cherish its transmitted 
memories as a kind of compensation for her own obliter- 
ated past. There had lived with Lawrence for many 
years an elderly woman, of exemplary virtue, Luciuda 
Brown by name, who had been a personal attendant of 
his mother, and since lier death had remained in his ser- 
vice as the lonely warden of his villa. Roger had an old- 
time regard for her, and it seemed to him that her house- 
wifely gossip might communicate to little Nora a ray of 
his mother's peaceful domestic genius. Lucinda, who 
had been divided between hope and fear as to Roger's 
possibly marrying, — the fear of a diminished empire hav- 
ing exceeded, on the whole, the hope of company below 
stairs, — accepted Nora's arrival as a very comfortable 
compromise. The child was too young to menace her 
authority, and yet of sufficient importance to warrant a 
gradual extension of the household economy. Lucinda 



26 WATCH AND WAKD. 

had a yision of new carpets and curtains, of a regenerated 
kitchen, of a series of new caps, of her niece coming to 
sew. Nora was the narrow end of the wedge ; it would 
broaden with her growth. Lucinda therefore was gra- 
cious. 

For Roger it seemed as if life had begun afresh and 
the world bad put on a new face. High above the level 
horizon now, clearly defined against the empty sky, rose 
this small commanding figure, with the added magnitude 
that objects acquire in this position. She gave him a 
great deal to think about. The child a man begets and 
rears weaves its existence insensibly into the tissue of 
his life, so that he becomes trained by fine degrees to the 
paternal office. But Iloger had to skip experience, and 
spring with a bound into the paternal consciousness. In 
fact he missed his leap, and never tried again. Time 
should induct him at leisure into his proper honors^ 
whatever they might be. He felt a strong aversion to 
claim in the child that prosaic right of property which 
belongs to the paternal name. He eagerly accepted bis 
novel duties and cares, but he shrank with a tender hu- 
mility of temper from all precise definition of his rights. 
He was too young and too sensible of his youth to wish 
to give this final turn to things. His heart was flattered, 
rather, by the idea of living at the mercy of change 
which might always be change for the better. It lay 
close to his heart, however, to drive away the dusky 
fears and sordid memories of Nora's anterior life. He 
strove to conceal the past from her childish sense by a 
great pictured screen of present joys and comforts. He 
wished her life to date from the moment he had taken 



WATCH AND WARD. 27 

her home. He had taken her for better, for worse ; but 
he longed to quench all baser chances in the daylight 
of actual security. His philosophy in this as in all things 
was extremely simple, — to make her happy that she 
might be good. Meanwhile as he cunningly devised her 
happiness, his own seemed securely established. He felt 
twice as much a man as before, and the world seemed as 
much again a world. All his small stale merits became 
fragrant with the virtue of unselfish use. 

One of his first acts, before he left town, had been to 
divest Nora of her shabby mourning and dress her afresh 
in childish colors. He learned from the proprietor's wife 
at his hotel that this was considered by several ladies in- 
terested in Nora's fortunes (especially by her of the sub- 
scription) an act of gross impiety ; but he held to his 
pui-pose, nevertheless. When she was freshly arrayed, 
he took her to a photographer and made her sit for half 
a dozen portraits. They were not flattering ; they gave 
her an aged, sombre, lifeless air. He showed them to 
two old ladies of his acquaintance, whose judgment he 
valued, without saying whom they represented ; the ladies 
pronounced her a " fright." It was directly after this 
that Roger hurried her away to the peaceful, uncritical 
country. Her manner here for a long time remained 
singularly docile and spiritless. She was not exactly sad, 
but neither was she cheerful. She smiled, as if from the 
fear to displease by not smiling. She had the air of a 
child who has been much alone, and who has learned 
quite to underestimate her natural right to amusement. 
She seemed at times hopelessly, defiantly torpid. 
"Heaven help me!" thought Roger, as he surreptitiously 



28 WATCH AND WARD. 

watched ber ; " is she going to be simply stupid ? " He 
perceived at last, however, that her listless quietude cov- 
ered a great deal of observation, and that growing may 
be a very soundless process. His ignorance of the past 
distressed and vexed him, jealous as he was of admitting 
even to himself that she had ever lived till now. He trod 
on tiptoe in the region of her early memories, in the dread 
of reviving some dormant claim, some ugly ghost. Yet 
he felt that to know so little of her twelve first years was 
to reckon without an important factor in his problem ; 
as if, in spite of his summons to all the fairies for this 
second baptism, the godmother-in-chief lurked maliciously 
apart. Nora seemed by instinct to have perceived tlie 
fitness of not speaking of her own affairs, and indeed dis- 
played in the matter a precocious good taste. Among 
her scanty personal effects the only object referring too 
vividly to the past had been a small painted photograph 
of her mother, a languid-looking lady in a low-necked 
dress, with a good deal of rather crudely rendered pretti- 
ness. Nora had apparently a timid reserve of compla- 
cency in the fact, which she once imparted to Roger Vith 
a kind of desperate abruptness, that her mother had been 
a public singer; and the heterogeneous nature of her 
own culture testified to some familiarity with the scenery 
of Bohemia. The common relations of things seemed 
quite reversed in her brief experience, and immaturity 
and precocity shared her young mind in the freest fellow- 
ship. She was ignorant of the plainest truths and credu- 
lous of the quaintest falsities ; unversed in the commonest 
learning and instructed in the rarest. She barely knew 
that the eai-th is round, but she knew that Leonora is the 



WATCH AND WARD. 29 

heroine of // Trovatore. She could neither write nor 
spell, but she could perforin the most surprising tricks 
with cards. She confessed to a passion for strong green 
tea, and to an interest in the romances of the Sunday 
newspapers. Evidently she had sprung from a horribly 
vulgar soil ; she was a brand snatched from the burning. 
She uttered various impolite words with the most guile- 
less accent and glance, and was as yet equally unsus- 
picious of the grammar and the Catechism. But when 
once Roger had straightened out her phrase she was care- 
ful to preserve its shape ; and when he had decimated her 
vocabulary she made its surviving particles suffice. For 
the rudiments of theological learning, also, she manifested 
a due respect. Considering her makeshift education, he 
wondered she was so much of a lady. His impression of 
her father was fatal, ineffaceable ; the late Mr. Lambert 
had been a blackguard. Roger had a fancy, however, 
that this was not all the truth. He was free to assume 
that the poor fellow's wife had been of a gentle nurture 
and temper ; and he even framed on this theme an in- 
genious little romance, which gave him a great deal of 
comfort Mrs. Lambert had been deceived by the im- 
pudent plausibility of her husband, and had come to her 
senses amid shifting expedients and struggling poverty, 
during which she had been glad to turn to account the 
voice which the friends of her happier girlhood had 
praised. She had died outwearied and broken-hearted, 
invoking human pity on her child. Roger established in 
this way a seiitimental intimacy with the poor lady's spirit, 
and exchanged many a greeting over the little girl's head 
with this vague maternal shape. But he was by no means 



30 WATCH AND WA£D. 

given up to these thin-spun joys ; he gave himself krger 
satisfactions. He deterniined to drive in the first nail 
with his own hands, to lay the smooth foundation-stones 
of Nora's culture, to teach her to read and write and 
cipher, to associate himself largely with the growth of her 
primal sense of things. Beholct him thus converted into 
a gentle pedagogue, prompting her with small caresses 
and correcting her with smiles. A moted morning sun- 
beam used to enter his little study, and, resting on Nora's 
auburn hair, seemed to make of the place a humming 
school-room. Roger began also to anticipate the future 
exactions of preceptorship. He plunged into a course of 
useful reading, and devoured a hundred volumes on edu- 
cation, on hygiene, on morals, on history. He drew up 
a table of rules and observances for the child's health ; 
he weighed and measured her food, and spent hours with 
Lucinda, the minister's wife, and the doctor, in the dis- 
cussion of her regimen and clothing. He bought her a 
pony, and rode with her over the neighboring country, 
roamed with her in the woods and fields, and picked out 
nice acquaintances for her among the little damsels of the 
country-side. A doting granddam, in all this matter, 
could not have shown a finer genius for detaiL His zeal 
indeed left him very little peace, and Lucinda often en- 
deavored to assuage it by the assurance that he was 
fretting himself away and wearing himself thin on his 
happiness. He passed a dozen times a week from the 
fear of coddling and spoiling the child to the fear of let- 
ting her run wild and grow coarse and rustic. Sometimes 
he dismissed her tasks for days together, and kept her 
idling at his side in the winter sunshine : sometimes for 



WATCH AND WAKD. 31 

a week he kept her within doors, reading to her, preach- 
ing to her, showing her prints, and telling her stories. 
She had an excellent musical ear, and the promise of a 
charming voice ; Roger took counsel in a dozen quarters 
as to whether he ought to make her use her voice or spare 
it. Once he took her up to town to a matinee at one of 
the theatres, and was in anguish for a week afterwards, 
lest he had quickened some inherited tendency to dissi- 
pation. He used to lie awake at night, trying hard to fix 
in his mind the happy medium between coldness and weak 
fondness. With a heart full of tenderness, he used to 
measure out his caresses. He was in doubt for a long 
time as to what he should make her call him. At the 
outset he decided instinctively against " papa." It was 
a question between "Mr. Lawrence" and his baptismal 
name. He weighed the proprieties for a week, and then 
he determined the child should choose for herself. She 
had as yet avoided addressing him by name ; at last he 
asked what name she preferred. She stared rather 
blankly at the time, but a few days afterwards he heard 
her shouting " Roger I " from the garden under his win- 
dow. She had ventured upon a small shallow pond en- 
closed by his land, and now coated with thin ice. The 
ice had cracked with a great report under her tread, and 
was swaying gently beneath her weight, at some yards 
from the edge. In her alarm her heart had chosen, and 
her heart's election was never subsequently gainsaid. 
Circumstances seemed to affect her slowly; for a long 
time she showed few symptoms of change. Roger in 
his slippers, by the fireside, in the winter evenings, used 
to gaze at her with an anxious soul^ and wonder whether 



32 WATCH AND WARD. 

it was not only a stupid child that could sit for an 
hour by the chimney-comer, stroking the cat's back 
in absolute silence, asking neither questions nor favors. 
Then, meeting her intelligent eyes, he would fancy that 
she was wiser than he knew ; that she was mocking him 
or judging him, and counterplotting his pious labors 
with elfish subtlety. Arrange it as he might, he could 
not call her pretty. Plain women are apt to be clever ; 
might she not (horror of horrors!) turn out too clever? 
In the evening, after she had attended Nora to bed, 
Lucinda would come into the little library, and she and 
Roger would solemnly put their heads together. In 
matters in which he deemed her sex gave her an ad- 
vantage of judgment, he used freely to ask her opinion. 
She made a great parade of motherly science, rigid 
spinster as she was, and hinted by many a nod and wink 
at the mystic depths of her sagacity. As to the child's 
being thankless or heartless, she quite reassured him. 
Did n't she cry herself to sleep, under her breath, on 
her little pillow ? Did n't she mention him every night 
in her prayers, — him, and him alone ? However much 
her family may have left to be desired as a " family," 
— and of its shortcomings in this respect Lucinda had 
an altogether awful sense, — Nora was clearly a lady in 
her own right. As for her plain face, they could wait 
awhile for a change. Plainness in a child was almost 
always prettiness in a woman ; and at all events, if she 
was not to be pretty, she need never be proud. 

Roger had no wish to remind his young companion of 
what she owed him ; for it was the very keystone of his 
plan that their relation should ripen into a perfect matter 



WATCH AND WAKD. 33 

of course; but he watched patiently, as a wandering 
botanist for the first woodland violets for the year, for 
the shy field-flower of spontaneous affection. He aimed 
at nothing more or less than to inspire the child with a 
passion. Until he had detected in her glance and tone 
the note of passionate tenderness his experiment must 
have failed. It would have succeeded on the day when 
she should break out into cries and tears and tell him 
with a clinging embrace that she loved him. So he ar- 
gued with himself; but, in fact, he expected perhaps 
more than belongs to the lame logic of this life. As a 
child, she would be too irreflective to play so pretty a 
part ; as a young girl, too self-conscious. I undertake, 
however, to tell no secrets. Roger, being by nature 
undemonstrative, continued to possess his soul in pa- 
tience. Nora, meanwhile, seemingly showed as little of 
distrust as of positive tenderness. She grew and grew 
in ungrudged serenity. It was in person, first, that she 
began gently, or rather ungently, to expand ; acquiring a 
well-nurtured stnrdiness of contour, but passing quite into 
the shambling and sheepish stage of girlhood. Lucinda 
cast about her in vain for possibilities of future beauty, 
and took refuge in vigorous attention to the young girl's 
bountiful auburn hair, which she combed and braided 
with a kind of fierce assiduity. The winter had passed 
away, the spring was well advanced. Roger, looking at the 
object of his adoption, felt a certain sinking of the heart 
as he thought of his cousin Hubert's visit. As matters 
stood, Nora bore rather livelier testimony to his charity 
than to his taste. 
He had debated some time as to whether he should 



34 WATCH AND WAED. 

write to Hubert and as to how he should write. Hubert 
Lawrence was some four years his junior ; but Roger 
had always allowed him a large precedence in the things 
of the mind. Hubert had just commenced parson; it 
seemed now that grace would surely lend a generous 
hand to nature and complete the circle of his accom- 
plishments. He was extremely good-looking and clever 
with just such a cleverness as seemed but an added per- 
sonal charm. He and Roger had been much together 
in early life and had formed an intimacy strangely com- 
pounded of harmony and discord. Utterly unlike in 
temper and tone, they, neither thought nor felt nor acted 
together on any single point. Roger was constantly 
differing, mutely and profoundly, and Hubert frankly 
and sarcastically ; but each, nevertheless, seemed to find 
in the other an irritating counterpart and complement. 
They had between them a kind of boyish levity which 
kept them from lingering long on delicate ground ; but 
they felt at times that they belonged, by temperament, to 
irreconcilable camps, and that the more each of them 
came to lead his own life, the moi*e their lives would 
diverge. Roger was of a loving turn of mind, and it 
cost him many a sigh that a certain glassy hardness of 
soul on his cousin's part was forever blunting the edge 
of his affection. He nevertheless had a deep regard for 
Hubert ; he admired his talents, he enjoyed his society, 
he wrapped him about with his good-will. He had told 
him more than once that he cared for him more than 
Hubert would ever believe, could in the.nature of things 
believe. He was willing to take his cousin seriously, 
even when he knew his cousin was not taking him so. 



WHTCH AND WARD. 35 

Hubert, who reserved his faith for heavenly mysteries, 
had small credence for earthly ones, and he would 
have affirmed that to his perception they loved each 
other with a precisely equal ardor, beyond everything in 
life, to wit, but themselves. Roger had in his mind a 
kind of metaphysical " idea" of a possible Hubert, which 
the actual Hubert took a wanton satisfaction in turning 
upside down. Roger had drawn in his fancy a pure and 
ample outline, into which the young ecclesiastic pro- 
jected a perversely ill-fitting shadow. Roger took his 
cousin more seriously than the young man took himself. 
In fact, Hubert had apparently come into the world to 
play. He played at life, altogether ; he played at learn- 
ing, he played at theology, he played at friendship ; and 
it was to be conjectured that, on particular holidays, he 
would play pretty hard at love. Hubert, for some time, 
had been settled in New York, and of late they had ex- 
changed but few letters. Something had been said about 
Hubert's coming to spend a part of his summer vacation 
tritb his cousin ; now that the latter was at the head of 
a household and a family, Roger reminded him of their 
understanding. He had finally told him his little ro- 
mance, with a fine bravado of indifference to his verdict; 
but he was, in secret, extremely anxious to obtain Hu- 
bert's judgment of the heroine. Hubert replied that he 
was altogether prepared for the news, and that it must 
be a very pretty sight to see him at dinner pinning her 
bib, or to hear him sermonizing her over a torn frock. 

" But, pray, what relation is the young lady to me ? " 
he added. " How far does the adoption go, and where 
does it stop ? Your own proper daughter would be my 



36 WATCH AND WARD. 

cousin ; but you can't adopt for other people. I shall 
wait till I see her ; then if she is pleasing, I shall admit 
her into cousinship." 

He came down for a fortnight, in July, and was soon 
introduced to Nora. She came sidling shyly into the 
room, with a rent in her short-waisted frock, and the 
** Child's Own Book " in her han<^ with her finger in the 
history of "The Discreet Princess." Hubert kissed her 
gallantly, and declared that he was happy to make her 
acquaintance. She retreated to a station beside Roger's 
knee, and stood staring at the young man. " Elle a les 
pieds enormes" said Hubert. 

Roger was annoyed, partly with himself, for he made 
her wear big shoes. " What do you think of him ? " 
he asked, stroking the child's hair, and hoping, half 
maliciously, that, with the frank perspicacity of child- 
hood, she would make some inspired " hit " about the 
young man. But to appreciate Hubert's failings, one 
must have had vital experience of them. At this tinie> 
twenty-five years of age, he was a singularly handsome 
youth. Although of about the same height as his cousin, 
the pliant slimness of his figure made him look taller. 
He had a cool blue eye and clustering yellow locks. 
His features were cut with admirable purity ; his teeth 
were white, his smile superb. " I think," said Nom, 
" that he looks like the Prince Avenant!^ 

Before Hubert went away, Roger asked him for a 
deliberate opinion of the child. Was she ugly or pretty ? 
was she interesting ? He found it hard, however, to in- 
duce him to consider her seriously. Hubert's observa- 
tion was exercised rather less in the interest of general 



WATCH AND WAED. 37 

truth than of particular profit ; and of what profit to 
Hubert was Nora's shambliug childhood ? "I can't 
think of her as a girl," he said ; " she seems to me a 
boy. She climbs trees, she scales fences, she keeps 
rabbits, she straddles upon your old mare. I found her 
this morning wading in the pond. She is growing up a 
hoyden ; you ought to give her more civilizing influences 
than she enjoys hereabouts ; you ought to engage a gov- 
erness, or send her to school. It is well enough now ; but, 
my poor fellow, what will you do when she is twenty P " 
You may imagine, from Hubert's sketch, that Nora's 
was a happy life. She had few companions, but dur- 
ing the long summer days, in woods and fields and or- 
chards, Roger initiated her into all those rural mysteries 
which are so dear to childhood and so fondly remembered 
in later years. She grew more hardy and lively, more 
inquisitive, more active. She tasted deeply of the joy of 
tattered dresses and sunburnt cheeks and arms, and long 
nights at the end of tired days. But Roger, pondering 
his cousin's words, began to believe that to keep her 
longer at home would be to fail of justice to the eici^e 
Weiblicke, The current of her growth would soon begin 
to flow deeper than the plummet of a man's wit. He 
determined, therefore, to send her to school, and he be- 
gan with this view to investigate the merits of various 
seminaries. At last, after a vast amount of meditation 
and an extensive correspondence with the school-keeping 
class, he selected one which appeared rich in fair prom* 
ises. Nora, who had never known an hour's schooling, 
entered joyously upon her new career ; but she gave her 
friend that sweet aud long-deferred emotion of which I 



38 WATCH AND WARD. 

have spoken, when, on parting with him, she hung npon 
his neck with a sort of convulsive fondness. He took 
her head in his two hands and looked at her ; her eyes 
were streaming with tears. During the month which 
followed he received from her a dozen letters, sadly mis- 
spelled, but divinely lachrymose. 

It is needless to relate in detail this phase of Nora's 
history, which lasted two years. Roger found that he 
missed her sadly ; his occupation was gone. Still, her 
very absence occupied him. He wrote her long letters 
of advice, told her everything that happened to him, and 
sent her books and useful garments, biscuits and oranges. 
At the end of a year he began to long terribly to take her 
back again ; but as his judgment forbade this measure, 
he determined to beguile the following year by travel. 
Before starting, he went to the little country town which 
was the seat of her academy, to bid Nora farewell. He had 
not seen her since she left him, as he had chosen, — quite 
heroically, poor fellow, — to have her spend her vacation 
with a schoolmate, the bosom friend of this especial 
period. He found her surprisingly altered. She looked 
three years older ; she was growing by the hour. Pret- 
tiuess and symmetry had not yet been vouchsafed to her ; 
but Roger found in her young imperfection a sweet as- 
surance that her account with nature was not yet closed. 
She had, moreover, an elusive grace. She had reached 
that charming girlish moment when the crudity of child- 
hood begins to be faintly tempered by the sense of sex. 
She was coming fast, too, into her woman's heritage of 
garrulity. She entertained him for a whole morning; 
she took him into her confidence ; she rattled and prat- 



WATCH AND WARD. 39 

tied nnceasinglj upon all the swarming little school inter- 
ests, — her likes and aversions, her hopes and fears, *her 
friends and teachers, her studies and story-books. Roger 
sat grinning in high enchantment; she seemed to him 
the very genius of girlhood. For the veij first time, 
he became conscious of her character ; there was an im- 
mense deal of her ; she overflowed. When they parted, 
he gave his hopes to her keeping in a long, long kiss. 
She kissed him too, but this time with smiles, not with 
tears. She neither suspected nor could she have under- 
stood the thought which, during this interview, had blos- 
somed in her friend's mind. On leaving her, he took a 
long walk in the country over unknown roads. That even- 
ing he consigned his thought to a short letter, addressed 
to Mrs. Keith. This was the present title of the lady 
who had once been Miss Morton. She had married and- 
gone abroad ; where, in Rome, she had done as the 
Americans do, and entered the Roman Church. His let- 
ter ran as follows : — 

Mt dear Mrs. Keith, — I promised you once to be very 
unhappy, but I doubt whether you believed me; you did not 
look as if you believed me. I am sure, at all events, you 
hoped otherwise. I am told you have become a Roman 
Catholic. Perhaps you have been praying for me at St. 
Peter's. This is the easiest way to account for my conversion 
to a worthier state of mind. You "know that, Iwo years ago, I 
adopted a homeless little girl. One of these days she will be 
a lovely woman. I mean to do what I can to make her one.- 
Perhaps, six years hence, she will be grateful enough not to 
refuse me as you did. Pray for me more than ever. I have 
began at the beginning ; it will be my own fault if I have not 
a perfect wife. 



\ 




III. 

|OGEB>*S journey was long and varioas. He went 
to the West Indies and to South America, whence* 
taking a ship at one of the eastern ports, he 
sailed round the Horn and paid a visit to Mexico. He 
journeyed thence to California, and returned home across 
the Isthmus, stopping awhile on his upward course at 
various Southern cities. It was in some degree a senti- 
mental journey. Roger was a practical man ; as he went 
he gathered facts and noted manners and customs ; but 
the muse of observation for him was the little girl at 
home, the ripening companion of his own ripe years. It 
was for her sake that he collected impressions and laid 
up treasure. He had determined that she should be a 
lovely woman and a perfect wife ; but to be worthy of 
such a woman as his fancy foreshadowed, he himself had 
much to learn. To be a good husband, one must first 
be a wise man; to educate her, he should first educate 
himself. He would make it possible that daily contact 
with him should be a liberal education, and that his sim- 
pie society should be a benefit. For this purpose he 
should be a fountain of knowledge, a compendium of ex- 
perience. He travelled in a spirit of solemn attention, like 



WATCH AND WAED. 41 

some grim devotee of a former age making a pilgrimage 
for the welfare of one he loved. He kept with great 
labor a copious diary, which he meant to read aloud on 
the winter nights of coming years. His diary was di- 
rectly addressed to Nora, she being implied throughout 
as reader or auditor. He thought at moments of his 
vow to Isabel Morton, and asked himself what had be- 
come of the passion of that hour. It had betaken itself 
to the common limbo of our dead passions. He rejoiced to 
know that she was well and happy ; he meant to write 
to her again on his return and tell her that he iiimself 
was as happy as she could wish to see hrm. He mused 
ever and anon on the nature of his affection for Nora, 
and wondered what earthly name he could call it by. 
Assuredly he was not in love with her : you could not fall 
in love with a child. But if he had not a lover's love, 
he had at least a lover's jealousy; it would have made 
him miserable to believe his scheme might miscarry. It 
would fail, he fondly assured himself, by no fault of hers. 
He was sure of her future; in that last interview at 
school he had guessed the answer to the riddle of her 
formless girlhood. If he could only be as sure of his 
own constancy as of hers ! On this point poor Roger 
might fairly have let his conscience rest ; but to test his 
resolution, he deliberately courted temptation, and on a 
dozen occasions allowed present loveliness to measure 
itself with absent promise. At the risk of a large expen- 
diture of blushes, he bravely incurred the blandishments 
of various charming persons of the South. They failed 
signally, in every case but one, to quicken his pulses. 
He studied these gracious persons, he noted their gifts 



42 WATCH AND WARD. 

and graces, so that Le might know the range of the femi- 
nine charm. Of the utmost that women can be and do 
he wished to have personal experience. But with the 
sole exception I have mentioned, not a syren of them all 
but shone with a radiance less magical than that dim 
but rounded shape which glimmered forever in the dark 
future, like the luminous complement of the early moon. 
It was at Lima that his poor little potential Nora suffered 
temporary eclipse. He made here the acquaintance of a 
young Spanish lady whose plump and full-blown inno- 
cence seemed to him divinely amiable. If ignorance is 
grace, what a lamentable folly to be wise! He liad 
crossed from Havana to Eio on the same vessel with her 
brother, a friendly young fellow, who had made him 
promise to come and stay with him on his arrival at Lima. 
Koger, in execution of this promise, passed three weeks 
under his roof, in the society of the lovely Teresita. She 
caused him to reflect, with a good deal of zeal. She 
moved him the more because, being wholly without co- 
quetry, she made no attempt whatever to interest him. 
Her charm was the charm of absolute naivete, and a cer- 
tain tame unseasoned sweetness, — the sweetness of an 
angel who is without mundane reminiscences ; to say- 
nothing of a pair of liquid hazel eyes and a coil of 
crinkled blue-black hair. She could barely write her 
name, and from the summer twilight of her mind, which 
seemed to ring with amorous bird-notes, she flung a dis- 
paraging shadow upon Nora's prospective condition. 
Roger thought of Nora, by contrast, as a kind of superior 
doll, a thing wound up with a key, whose virtues would 
make a tic4ic if one listened. Why travel so far about 



WATCH AND WARD. 43 

for a wife, when here was one ready made to liis heart, 
as illiterate as an angel, and as faithful as the little page 
of a mediseval ballad, — and with those two perpetual 
love-lights beneath her silly little forehead P 

Day by day, near the pretty Peruvian, Roger grew 
better pleased with the present. It was so happy, so 
idle, so secure ! He protested against the future. He 
grew impatient of the stiff little figure which he had 
posted in the distance, to stare at him with those mon- 
strous pale eyes ; they seemed to grow and grow as he 
thought of them. In other words, he was in love with 
Teresa. She, on her side, was delighted to be loved. 
She caressed him with her fond^dark looks and smiled 
perpetual assent. Late one afternoon they ascended 
together to a terrace on the top of the house. The sun 
had just disappeared; the southern landscape was drinking 
in the cool of night. They stood awhile in silence ; at last 
Roger felt that he must speak of his love. He walked 
away to the farther end of the terrace, casting about in 
his mind for the fitting words. They were hard to find. 
His companion spoke a little English, and he a little 
Spanish ; but there came upon him a sudden perplexing 
sense of the infantine rarity of her wits. He had never 
done her the honor to pay her a compliment, he had 
never really talked with her. It was not for him to talk, 
but for her to perceive I She turned about, leaning back 
against the parapet of the terrace, looking at him and 
smiling. She was always smiling. She had on an old faded 
pink morning dress, very much open at the throat, and a 
ribbon round her neck, to which was suspended a little 
cross of turquoise. One of the braids of her hair had fallen 



44 WATCH AND WARD. 

down, and she bad drawn it forward, and was plaiting 
tlie end with her plump white fingers. Her nails were 
not fastidiously clean. He went towards her. When he 
next became perfectly conscious of their relative posi- 
tions, he knew that he had tenderly kissed her, more 
than once, and that she had more than suffered him. He 
stood holding both her hands; he was blushing; her 
own complexion was undisturbed, her smile barely deep- 
ened ; another of her braids had come down. He was 
filled with a sense of pleasure in her sweetness, tempered 
by a vague feeling of pain in his all-to-easy conquest. 
There was nothing of poor Teresita but that you could 
kiss her ! It came updn him with a sort of horror that 
he had never yet distinctly told her that he loved her. 
"Teresa," he said, almost angrily, "I love you. Do 
you understand?" For all answer she raised his two 
hands successively to her lips. Soon after this she went 
off with her mother to church. 

The next morning, one of his friend's clerks brought 
him a package of letters from his banker. One of them 
was a note from Nora. It ran as follows : — 

Dear Roger : I want so much to tell you that I have just 
got the prize for the piano. I hope you will not think it very 
silly to write so far only to tell you this. Bat I am so proud 
1 want you to know it. Of the three girls who tried for it, 
two were seventeen. The prize is a beautiful picture' called 
" Mozart a Vienne " ; probably you have seen it. Miss Murray- 
says I may hang it up in my bedroom. Now I have got to go 
and practise, for Miss Murray says I must practise more than 
ever. My dear Roger, I do hope you are enjoying your travels. 
1 have learned a great deal of geography, following you on the 
map. Don't ever forget your loving Nora. 



WATCH AND WARD, 45 

After reading this letter, Roger told his host that he 
should have to leave him. The young Peruvian demurred, 
objected, and begged for a reason. 

" Well," said Roger, " I find I am in love with your 
sister." The words sounded on his ear as if some else 
had spoken them. Teresita's hght was quenched, and she 
had no more fascination than a smouldering lamp, smell- 
ing of oil. 

" Why, my dear fellow," said his friend, " that seems 
to me a reason for staying. I shall be most happy to 
have you for a brother-in-law." 

" It 's impossible ! I am engaged to a young lady in 
my own country." 

" You are in love here, you are engaged there, and you 
go where you are engaged ! You Englishmen are strange 
fellows ! " 

" Tell Teresa that I adore her, but that I am pledged 
at home. I would rather not see her." 

And so Roger departed from Lima, without further 
communion with Teresita. On his return home he re- 
ceived a letter from her brother, telling him of her en- 
gagement to a young merchant of Valparaiso, — an 
excellent match. The young lady sent him her saluta- 
tions. Roger, answering his friend's letter, begged that 
the Dofia Teresa would accept, as a wedding-present, of 
the accompanying trinket, — a little brooch in turquoise. 
It would look very well with pink I 

Roger reached home in the autumn, but left Nora at 
school till the beginning of the Christmas holidays. He 
occupied the interval in refurnishing his house, and clear- 
ing the stage for the last act of the young girl's childhood. 



46 WATCH AND WAKD. 

He had always possessed a modest taste for upholstery ; 
he now began to apply it under the guidance of a delicate 
idea. His idea led him to prefer, in all things, the fresh 
and graceful to the grave and formal, and to wage war 
throughout his old dwelling on the lurking mustiness of 
the past. He had a lively regard for elegance, balanced 
by a horror of wanton luxury. He fancied that a woraau 
is the better for being well dressed and well domiciled, 
and that vanity, too stingily treated, is sure to avenge 
itself. So he took vanity into account. Nothing an- 
noyed him more, however, than the fear of seeing Nora 
a precocious fine lady ; so that while he aimed at all pos- 
sible purity of effect, he stayed his hand here and there 
before certain admonitory relics of ancestral ugliness and 
virtue, embodied for the most part in hair-cloth and 
cotton damask. Chintz and muslin, flowers and photo- 
graphs and books, gave their clear light tone to the 
house. Nothing could be more tenderly propitious aud 
virginal, or better chosen both to chasten the young girl's 
aspirations and to remind her of her protector's tender- 
ness. 

Since his return he had designedly refused himself a 
glimpse of her. He wished to give her a single undivided 
welcome to his home and his heart. Shortly before 
Christmas, as he had even yet not set his house in order, 
Lucinda Brown was sent to fetch her from school. If 
Roger had expected that Nora would return with any 
striking accession of beauty, he would have had to say 
" Amen " with an effort. She had pretty well ceased to 
be a child ; she was still his grave, imperfect Nora. She 
had gained her full height, — a great height, which her 



WATCH AND WARD. 47 

young strong slimness rendered tbe more striking. Her 
slender throat supported a head of massive mould, bound 
about with dense auburn bmids. Beneath a somewhat 
serious brow her large, fair eyes retained their collected 
light, as if uncertain where to fling it. Now and then 
the lids parted widely and showered down these gathered 
shafts ; and if at these times a certain rare smile divided, 
in Iiarmony, her childish lips, Nora was for the moment 
a passable beauty. But for the most part, the best charm 
of her face was in a modest refinement of line, which 
rather evaded notice than courted it. The first impres- 
sion she was likely to produce was of a kind of awkward 
slender majesty. Roger pronounced her " stately," and 
for a fortnight thought her too imposing by half; but 
as the dajs went on, and the pliable innocence of early 
maidenhood gave a soul to this formidable grace, lie 
began to feel that in essentials she was still the little 
daughter of his charity. He even began to observe in 
her an added consciousness of this lowly position ; as if 
with the growth of her mind she had come to reflect upon 
it, and deem it less and less a matter of course. He 
meditated much as to whether he should frankly talk it 
over with her and allow her to feel that, for him as well, 
their relation could never become commonplace. This 
would be in a measure untender, but would it not be 
prudent ? Ought he not, in the interest of his final pur- 
pose, to infuse into her soul in her sensitive youth an im- 
pression of all that she owed him, so that when his time 
bad come, if her imagination should lead her a-wandering, 
gratitude would stay her steps ? A dozen times over he 
was on the verge of making his point, of saying, " Nora, 



48 WATCH AND WARD. 

Nora, these are not vulgar alms ; I expect a return. One 
of these days you must pay your debt. Guess my riddle ! 
I love you less than you think — and more ! A word to 
the wise." But he was silenced by a saving sense of 
the brutality of such a course and by a suspicion that, 
after all, it was not needful. A passion of gratitude was 
silently gathering in the young girl's heart : that heart 
could be trusted to keep its engagements. A deep con- 
ciliatory purpose seemed now to pervade her life, of in- 
finite delight to Roger as little by little it stole upon his 
mind like the fragrance of a deepening sprhig. He had 
his idea; he suspected that she had hei*s. They were 
but opposite faces of the same deep need. Her musing 
silence, her deliberate smiles, the childish keenness of her 
questionings, the delicacy of her little nameless services 
and caresses, were all a kind of united acknowledgment 
and promise. 

On Christmas eve they sat together alone by a blazing 
log-fire in Rx)ger's little library. He had been reading 
aloud a chapter of his diary, to which Nora sat listening 
in dutiful demureness, though her thoughts evidently 
were nearer home than Cuba and Peru. There is no 
denying it was dull ; he could gossip to better purpose. 
He felt its dulness himself, and closing it finally with 
good-humored petulance, declared it was fit only to throw 
into the fire. Upon which Nora looked up, protesting. 
" You must do no such thing," she said. ** You must 
keep your journals carefully, and one of these days I 
shall have them bound in morocco and gilt, and ranged 
in a row in my own bookcase." 

" That is but a polite way of burning them up," said 



WATCH AND WARD. 49 

Roger. " They will be as little read as if they were in 
the fire. I don't know bow it is. They seemed to be 
very amusing when I wrote them : they are as stale as 
an old newspaper now. I can't write : that 's the amount 
of it. I am a veiy stupid fellow, Nora ; you might as 
well know it first as laist." 

Nora's school had been of the punctilious Episcopal 
order, and she had learned there the pretty custom of 
decorating the house at Christmas-tide with garlands and 
crowns of evergreen and holly. She had spent the day 
in decking out the chimney-piece, and now, seated on a 
stool under the mantel-shelf, she twisted the last little 
wreath which was to complete her design. A great still 
snow-storm was falling without, and seemed to be blocking 
them in from the world. She bit off the thread with 
which she had been binding her twigs, held out her gar- 
land to admire its effect, and then, " I don't believe you 
are stupid, Roger," she said ; " and if I did, I should not 
much care." 

" Is that philosophy, or indifference ? " said the young 
man. 

** I don't know that it *s either; it 's because I know 
you are so good." 

" That is what they say about all stupid people." 

Nora added another twig to her wreath and bound it 
up. " I am sure," she said at last, " that when people 
are as good as you are, they cannot be stupid. I should 
like some one to tell me you are stupid. I know, Roger ; 
/ know ! " 

The young man began to feel a little uneasy ; it was 
no part of his plan that her good-will should spend itself 



50 :WATCH AND WARD. 

too soon. '* Dear me, Nora, if you think so well of me, 
I shall find it hard to live up to your expectations. I am 
afraid I shall disappoint you. I have a little gimcrack 
to put in your stocking to-night ; but I 'm rather ashamed 
of it now." 

" A gimcrack more or less is of small account. I have 
had uiy stocking hanging up these three years, and every- 
thing I possess is a present from you." 

Roger frowned ; the conversation had taken just such 
a turu as he had often longed to provoke, but now it was 
disagreeable to him. " O, come," he said ; " I have done 
simply my duty to my little girl." 

" But, Roger," said Nora, staring with expanded eyes, 
" I am not your little girl." 

His frown darkened ; his heart began to beat. " Don't 
talk nonsense ! " he said. 

"Bat, Roger, it is true. I am no one's little girl. 
Do you think I have.no memory ? Where is my father P 
Where is my mother P " 

** Listen to me," said Roger, sternly. "You must 
not talk of such things." 

" You must not forbid me, Roger. I can't think of 
them without thinking of you. This is Christmas eve ! 
Miss Murray told us that we must never let it pass with- 
out thinking of all that it means. But without Miss 
Murray, I have been thinking all day of things which 
are hard to name, — of death and life, of my parents and 
you, of my incredible happiness. I. feel to-night like a 
princess in a fairy-tale. I am a poor creature, without a 
friend, without a penny or a home ; and yet, here I sit 
by a blazing fire, with money, with food, with clothes. 



WATCH AND WARD. 51 

with love. The snow outside is burying the stone-walls, 
and yet here I can sit and simply say, * How pretty ! ' 
Suppose I were in it, wanderiug and begging, — I might 
have been! Should I think it pretty then? Roger, 
Roger, I am no one's child ! " The tremor in her voice 
deepened, and she broke into a sudden passion of tears. 
Roger took her in his arms and tried to soothe away her 
sobs. But she disengaged herself and went on with an 
almost fierce exaltation : " No, no, I won't be comforted ! 
I have had comfort enough ; I hate it. I want for an 
hour to be myself and feel hqw little that is, to be my 
miserable father's daughter, to fancy I hear my mother's 
voice. I have never spoken of them before ; you must 
let me to-night. You must tell me about my father ; you 
know something. I don't. You never refused me any- 
thing, Roger ; don't refuse me this. He was not good, 
like you ; but now he can do no harm. You have never 
mentioned his name to me, but happy as we are here to- 
gether, we ought not, — we ought not, to despise him ! " 
Roger yielded to the vehemence of this flood of emo- 
tion. He stood watching her with two helpless tears in 
his own eyes, and then he drew her gently towards him 
and kissed her on the forehead. She took up her work 
again, and he told her, with every minutest detail he 
could recall, the story of his sole brief interview with Mr. 
Lambert. Gradually he lost the seuse of effort and reluc- 
tance, and talked freely, abundantly, almost with pleasure. 
Nora listened very solemnly, — with an amount of self- 
control which denoted the habit of constant retrospect. 
She asked a hundred questions as to Roger's impression of 
her father's appearance. Was he not wonderfully hand- 



52 WATCH AND WARD. 

some ? Then taking up tlie tale berself, she poured out 
a torrent of feverish reminiscence. She disinterred her 
early memories with a kind of rapture of relief. Her 
evident joy in this frolic of confidence gave Roger a 
pitying sense of what her long silence must have cost 
her. But evidently she bore him no grudge, and his 
present tolerance of her rambling gossip seemed to her 
but another proof of his charity. She rose at last, and 
stood before, the fire, into which she had thrown the 
refuse of her greenery, watching it blaze up and turn to 
ashes. ** So much for the past ! " slie said, at last. 
** The rest is the future. The girls at school used to be 
always talking about what they meant to do in coming 
years, what they hoped, what they wished ; wouderiug, 
choosing, imagining. You don't know how girls talk^ 
Roger : you would be surprised ! I never used to say 
much : my future is fixed. I have nothing to choose^ 
nothing to hope, nothing to fear. I am to make you 
happy. That's simple enough. You have undertaken 
to bring me up, Roger; you must do your best, because 
now I am here, it 's for long, and you would rather have 
a wise girl than a silly one." And she smiled with a 
kind of tentative daughterliness through, the traces of 
her receijt grief. She put her two hands on liis shoul- 
ders and eyed him with conscious gravity. " You shall 
never repent. I shall learn everything, I shall be every- 
thing ! Oh ! I wish I were pretty." And she tossed 
back her head, in impatience of her fatal plainness, with 
an air which forced Roger to assure her that she would 
do very well as she was. "If you are satisfied," she 
said, " I am ! " For a moment Roger felt as if she were 
twenty years old. 



WATCH AND WAKD. 53 

This serious Cliristmas eve left its traces upon many 
ensuing weeks. Nora's education was resumed with a 
certain added solemnity. Roger was no longer obliged 
to condescend to the level of her intelligence, and he 
found reason to thank his stars that he had improved 
his own mind. He found use for all the knowledge he 
])ossessed. The day of childish "lessons" was over, 
and Nora sought instruction in the perusal of various 
classical authors, in her own and other tongues, in con- 
cert with her friend. They read aloud to each other 
alternately, discussed their acquisitions, and digested 
them with perhaps equal rapidity. Roger, in former 
years, had had but a small literary appetite ; he Uked a 
few books and knew them well, but he felt as if to settle 
down to an unread author were very like starting on a 
journey, — a case for farewells, packing trunks, and buy- 
ing tickets. His curiosity, »now, however, imbued and 
quickened with a motive, led him through a hundred 
untrodden paths. He found it hard sometimes to keep 
pace with Nora's pattering step; through the flowery 
lanes of poetry, in especial, she would gallop without 
drawing breath. Was she quicker-witted than her friend, 
or only more superficial ? Something of one, doubtless, 
and something of the other. Roger was forever sus- 
pecting her of a deeper penetration than his own, and 
hanging his head with an odd mixture of pride and hu- 
mility. Her quick perception, at times, made him feel 
irretrievably dull and antiquated. His ears would tingle. 
Lis cheeks would bum, his old hope would fade into a 
shadow. " It 's worse than useless," he would declare. 
" How can I ever have for her that charm of infiallibility. 



54 WATCH AND WARD. 

m 

that romance of omniscience, tbat a woman demands of 
ber lover ? She has seen me scratching my head, she has 
seen me counting on my fingers ! Before she is seven- 
teen she will be mortally tired of me, and by the time 
she is twenty I shall be fatally familiar and incurably 
stale. It 's very well for her to talk about life-long de- 
votion and eternal gratitude. She doesn't know the 
meaning of words. She must grow and outgrow, that 
is her first necessity. She must come to woman's estate 
and pay the inevitable tribute. I can open the door and 
let in the lover. If she loves me now I shall have had 
my turn. I can't hope to be the object of two passions. 
I must thank the Lord for small favors ! " Then as he 
seemed to taste, in advance, the bitterness of disappoint- 
ment, casting about him angrily for some means of ap- 
peal: "I ought to go away and stay away for years 
and never write at all, instead of compounding ponderous 
diaries to make even my absence detestable. I ought to 
convert myself into a beneficent shaddw, a vague tute- 
lary name. Then I ought to come back in glory, fra- 
grant with exotic perfumes and shod with shoes of mys- 
tery ! Otherwise, I ought to clip the wings of her 
fancy and put her on half-rations. I ought to snub her 
and scold her and bully her and tell her she 's deplorably 
plain, — treat her as Rochester treats Jane Eyre* If I 
were only a good old Catholic, that I might shut her up 
in a convent and keep her childish and stupid and con- 
tented ! " Roger felt that he was too doggedly consci- 
entious ; but abuse his conscience as he would, he could 
not make it yield an inch ; so that in the constant strife 
between his egotistical purpose and his generous temper. 



WATCH AND WAHD. 55 

Die latter kept gaining ground, and Nora innocently en- 
joyed the spoils of victory. It was his very generosity 
that detained him on the spot, by her side, watching her, 
working for her, performing a hundred oflSces which 
other hands would have but scanted. Bx)ger watched in- 
tently for the signs of that inevitable hour when a young 
girl begins to loosen her fingers in the grasp of a guid- 
ing hand and wander softly in pursuit of the sinuous 
silver thread which deflects, through meadows of peren- 
nial green, from the dull gray stream of the common lot. 
She had relapsed in the course of time into the cai*eless 
gayety and the light, immediate joys of girlhood. If she 
cherished a pious purpose in her heart, she made no in- 
decent parade of it. But her very placidity and patience 
somehow afliicted her friend. She was too monotonous- 
ly sweet, too easily obedient. If once in a while she 
would only flash out into petulance or rebellion ! She 
kept her temper so carefully : what in the world was she 
keeping it for ? If she would only bless him for once 
with an angry look and tell him that he bored her ! 

During the second year after her return from school 
Roger began to imagine that she avoitled his society 
and resented his attentions. She was fond of lonely 
walks, readings, reveries. She was fond of novels, and 
she read a great many. For works of fiction in general 
Roger had no great relish, though he confessed to three 
or four old-fashioned favorites. These were not always 
Nora's. One evening, in the ea^^ly spring she sat down 
to a twentieth perusal of the olassio tale of " The Heir of 
Redcliflje." Roger, as usual, asked Iver to read aloud. 
She began, and proceeded through a dozen pages; 



56 WATCH AND WAKD. 

Looking up, at this poiut, slie beheld Koger asleep. 
She smiled softly, and privately resumed her reading. 
At the end of an hour, Roger, having finished his nap, 
rather startled her by his excessive annoyance at his 
lapse of consciousness. He wondered whether he had 
snored, but the absurd fellow was ashamed to ask her. 
Recovering himself finally, "The fact is, Nora," he 
said, " all novels seem to me stupid. They are nothing 
1o what / can fancy I I have in my heart a prettier 
romance than any of them." 

" A romance ? " said Nora, simply. " Pray let me hear 
it. You are quite as good a hero as this stick of a Philip. 
Begin ! " 

He stood before the fire, looking at her with almost 
funereal gravity. " My denouement is not yet written," 
he said. " Wait till the story is finished ; then you shall 
hear the whole." 

As at this time Nora put on long dresses and began to 
arrange her hair as a young lady, it occurred to Roger 
that he might make some change in his own appearance 
and reinforce his waning attractions. He was now thirty, 
three ; he fancied he was growing stout. Bald, corpulent, 
middle-aged, — at this rate he should soon be shelved! 
He was seized with a mad desire to win back the lost 
graces of youth. He had a dozen interviews with his 
tailor, the result of which was that for a fortnight he ap- 
peared daily in a new garment. Suddenly, amid this 
restless longing to revise and embellish himself, he deter- 
mined to suppress his whiskers. This would take off five 
years. He appeared, therefore, one morning, in the severe 
simplicity of a mustache. Nora started, and greeted 



WATCH AND WARD. 57 

liim witb a little cry of horror. " Doa't you like itP" 
he asked. 

She hung her head on one side and the other. " Well, 
no, — to be frank." 

" 0, of course to be frank ! It will only take five 
years to grow them again. What is the trouble ? " 

She gave a critical frown. ^ " It makes you look too, — 
too fat ; too much Hke Mr. Vose." It is sufficient to 
explain that Mr. Vose was the butcher, who called every 
day in his cart, and who recently, — Bx)ger with horror 
only now remembered it, — had sacrificed his whiskers to 
a mysterious ideal. 

" I am sorry ! " said Roger. " It was for you I did 
it ! " 

" For me I " And Nora burst into a violent laugh. 

'* Why, my dear Nora," cried the young man with a 
certain angry vehemence, " don't I do everything in life 
for you ? " 

She became grave again. Then, after much meditation, 
" Excuse my unfeeling levity," she said. " You might 
cut off your nose, Roger, and I should like your face as 
well." But this was but half comfort. " Too fat ! " 
Her subtler sense had spoken, and Roger never encoun- 
tered Mr. Vose for three months after this without wishing 
to attack him with one of his own cleavers. 

He made now an heroic attempt to scale the frowning 
battlements of the future. He pretended to be making 
arrangements for a tour in Europe, and for having his 
house completely remodelled in his absence ; noting the 
while attentively .the effect upon Nora of his cunning 
machinations. But she gave no sign of suspicion that 



58 WATCH AND WAKD. 

Lis fatare, to the uttermost day, could be ahjtliiug but 
her future too. Oue eveuiug, nevertheless, an incident 
occurred which fatally confounded his calculations, — an 
evening of perfect mid-spring, full of warm, vague odors, 
of growing daylight, of the sense of bursting sap and 
fresii-turued earth. Bx)ger sat on the piazza, looking out 
on these things with an opera-glass. Nora, who had been 
strolling in tiie garden, returned to the house and sat 
down on the steps of the portico. " Ex)ger," she said, 
after a pause, '' has it never struck you as very strange 
that we should be living together in this way ? " 

Roger's heart rose to his throat. But he was loath to : 
concede anything, lest he should concede too much. ** It 
is not especially strange," he said. 

** Surely it is strange," she answered. " What are you ? 
Neither my brother, nor my father, nor my uncle, nor my 
cousin, — nor even, by law, my guardian." 

"By law ! My dear child, what do you know about 
law ? " 

" I know that if I should run away and leave you now,' 
you could not force me to return." 

" That 's fine talk ! Who told you that P " 

" No one ; I thought of it myself. As I grow older, 
I ought to think of such things." 

" Upon my word I Of running away and leaving me ? " 

" Tiiat is but one side of the question. The other is 
that you can turn me out of your house this moment, and 
no one can force you to take me back. I ought to re- 
member such things." 

" Pray what good will it do you to remember them P " 

Nora hesitated a moment. " There is always some 
good in not losing sight of the truth." 



WATCH AND WARD. 59 

"The truth ! You are very young to begin to talk 
about the truth." 

" Not too young. I am old for my age. I ought to 
be ! " These last words were uttered with a little sigh 
which roused Roger to action. 

" Since we are talking about the truth," he said, " I 
wonder whether you know a tithe of it." 

For an instant she was silent ; then, rising slowly to 
her feet, " What do you mean ? " she asked. " Is there 
any secret in all that you have done for me P " Suddenly 
she clasped her hands, end eagerly, with a smile, went on : 
" You said the other day you had a romance. Is it a real 
romance, Roger? Are you, after all, related to me, — 
my cousin, my brother ? " 

He let her stand before him, perplexed and expectant. 
** It is more of a romance than that." 

She slid upon her knees at his feet. " Dear Roger, do 
tell me," she said. 

He began to stroke her hair. " You think so much," 
he answered ; " do you never think about the future, the 
real future, ten years hence ? " 

" A great deal." 

" What do you think ? " 

She blushed a little, and then he felt that she was 
drawing confidence from his face. "Promise not to 
laugh ! " she said, half laughing herself. He nodded. 
" I think about my husband I " she proclaimed. And 
then, as if she had, after all, been very absurd, and to 
forestall his laughter, " And about your wife ! " she 
quickly added. " I want dreadfully to see her. Why 
don't you marry ? " 



60 WATCH AND WARD. 

He continued to stroke her hair in silence. At last he 
said sententiously, " I hope to marry one of these days." 

" I wish you would do it now," Nora went on. " If 
only she would be nice ! We should be sisters^ and I 
should take care of the children." 

" You are too young to understand what you say, or 
what I mean. Little girls should not talk about marriage. 
It can mean nothing to you until you come yourself to 
marry, — as you will, of course. You will have to decide 
and choose." 

" I suppose I shall. I shall refuse him." 

" What do you mean ? " 

But, without answering his question, " Were you ever 
in love, Roger ? " she suddenly asked. '* Is that your 
romance ? " 

" Almost." 

" Then it is not about me, after all ? " 

'* It is about you, Nora ; but, after all, it is not a ro- 
mance. It is solid, it is real, it is truth itself; as true as 
your silly novels are false. Nora, I care for no one, I 
shall never care for any one, but you ! " 

He spoke in tones so deep and solemn that she was im- 
pressed. " Do you mean, Roger, that you care so much 
for me that you will never marry ? " 

He rose quickly in his chair, pressing his hand over 
his brow. " Ah, Nora," he cried, "you are very painful ! " 

If she had annoyed him she was very contrite. She 
took his two hands in her own. "Bx)ger," she whis- 
pered gravely, " if you don't wish it, I promise never, 
never, never to marry, but to be yours alone, — yours 
alone I " 






■ "-^ -^-v Vr" '' '^J -^^' "^^-^ 



I 




IV. 

|HE summer passed away ; Nora was tamed six- 
teen. Deeming it time she should begin to see 
something of the world, Roger spent the autumn 
in travelling. Of his tour in Europe he had ceased to talk ; 
it was indefinitely deferred. It matters little where they 
went ; Nora greatly enjoyed the excursion, and found all 
spots alike delightful. To Roger himself it gave a great 
deal of comfort. Whether or no his companion was pretty, 
people certainly looked at her. He overheard them a 
dozen times call her "striking." Striking ! The word 
seemed to him rich in meaning ; if he had seen her for 
the first time taking the breeze on the deck of a river 
steamer, he certainly should have been struck. Ou his 
return home he found among his letters the following 
missive : — 

Mt DEAR Str: I^have learned, after various fruitless re- 
searches, that you have adopted my cousin. Miss Lambert, at 
the time she left St. Louis, was too youug to know much about 
her family, or even to care much ; and you, I suppose, have not 
investigated the subject. You, however, better than any one, 
can understand my desire to make' her acquaintance. I hope 
you will not deny me the privilege. I am the second son of a 



62 WATCH AND WARD. 

half-sister of her mother, hetween whom and my own mother 
there was always the greatest affection. It was not nntil some 
time after it happened that I heard of Mr. Lamhert's melan- 
choly death. But it is useless to recur to that painful scene I 
I resolved to spare no trouble in ascertaining the fate of his 
daughter. I have only just succeeded, after having almost 
given her up. I have thought it better to write to you than to 
her, but I beg you to give her my compliments. I anticipate 
no difficulty in satisfying yon that I am not an impostor. I 
have no hope of being able to better her circumstances ; but, 
whatever they may be, blood is blood, and cousins are cousins^ 
especially in the West. A speedy answer will oblige 

Yours truly, 

Geokge Fenton. 

The letter was dated in New York, from an hotel. 
Roger felt a certain dismay. It had been from the first 
a peculiar satisfaction to him that Nora began and ended 
so distinctly with herself. But here was a hint of indefi- 
nite continuity ! Here, at last, was an echo of her past. 
He immediately showed the letter to Nora. As she read* 
it, her face flushed deep with wonder and suppressed re- 
lief. She had never heard, she confessed, of her mother's 
half-sister. The " great affection " between the two la- 
dies must have been anterior to Mrs. Lambert's marriage. 
Roger's own provisional solution of the problem was that 
Mrs. Lambert had married so little to the taste of her 
family as to forfeit all communication with them. If he 
had obeyed his first impulse, he would have written to his 
mysterious petitioner that Miss Lambert was sensible of 
the honor implied in his request, but that never baring 
missed his attentions, it seemed needless that, at this time 



. WATCH AND WARD. 63 

of day, slie should cultivate them. But Nora was inter- 
ested in Mr. Fenton ; the dormant pulse of kinship had 
been quickened ; it began to throb with delicious ])ower. 
This was enough for Roger. " I don't know," he said, 
" whether he 's an honest man or a scamp, but at a ven- 
ture I suppose I must invite him down." To this Nora 
replied that she thouglit his letter was " so beautiful " ; 
and Mr. Fenton received a fairly civil summons. 

Whether or no he was an honest man remained to be 
seen ; but on the face of the matter he appeared no scamp. 
He was, in fact, a person difficult to classify. Roger had 
made up his mind that he would be outrageously rough 
and Western ; full of strange oaths and bearded, for 
aught he knew, like the pard. In aspect, however, Fen- 
ton was a pretty fellow enough, and his speech, if not 
especially conciliatory to ears polite, possessed a certain 
homely vigor in which ears polite might have found their 
account. He was as little as possible, certainly, of 
Roger's circle ; but he carried about him the native 
fragrance of another circle, beside which the social per- 
fume familiar to Roger's nostrils might have seemed a 
trifle stale and insipid. He was invested with a loose- 
fitting cosmopolitan Occidentalism, which seemed to say 
to Roger that, of the two, he was the provincial. Con- 
sidering his years, — they numbered but twenty-five, — 
Fenton's tough maturity was very wonderful. You would 
have confessed, however, that he had a true genius for his 
part, and that it became him better to play at manhood 
than at juvenility. He could never have been a ruddy- 
cheeked boy. He was tall and lean, with a keen dark eye, 
a smile humorous, but not exactly genial, a thin, drawl- 



64 WATCH AND WABD. 

ing, almost feminine voice, and a strange Southwestern 
accent. His voice, at first, might have given you certain 
presumptuous Iiopes as to a soft spot in his stiff joung 
]u(le ; but after listening awhile to its colorless monotone, 
you would have felt, I think, that though it was an in- 
strument of one string, that solitary chord was not likely 
to become relaxed. Fenton was furthermore flat-chested 
and high-shouldered, though he was evidently very strong. 
His straight black hair was always carefully combed, and 
a small diamond pin adorned the bosom of his shirt. His 
feet were small and slender, and his left hand was deco- 
rated with a neat specimen of tattooing. You never would 
have called him modest, yet you would hardly have called 
him impudent; for he had evidently lived with people 
who had not analyzed appreciation to this fine point. He 
had nothing whatever of the manner of society, but it was 
surprising how gracefully a certain shrewd bonhomie and 
smart good-humor enabled him to dispense with it. He 
stood with his hands in his pockets, watching punctilio 

take its course, and thinking, probably, what a d d fool 

she was to go so far roundabout to a poiut he could reach 
with a single shufile of his long legs. Roger, from the 
first hour of his being in the house, felt pledged to dislike 
him. Fenton patronized him ; he made him feel like a small 
boy, like an old woman ; he sapped the roots of the poor 
fellow's comfortable consciousness of being a man of the 
world. Fenton was a man of twenty worlds. He had 
knocked about and dabbled in affairs and adventures since 
he was ten years old ; he knew the American continent 
as he knew the palm of his hand ; he was redolent of 
enterprise, of "operations," of a certain fierce frictioa 



WATCH AND WAED. 65 

with mankind. Eoger M^ould have liked to belieye that 
he doubted his word, that there was a chance of his not 
being Nora's cousin, but a youth of an ardent swindling 
genius who had come into possession of a parcel of facts 
too provokinglj pertinent to be wasted. He had evi- 
dent] J known the late Mr. Lambert, — the poor man must 
have had plenty of such friends ; but was be, in truth, his 
wife's nephew? Had not this shadowy nepotism been 
excogitated over an unpaid hotel bill ? So Roger fret- 
fully meditated, but generally with no great gain of 
ground. He inclined, on the whole, to beUeve the young 
man's pretensions were valid, and to reserve his pugnacity 
for the use he might possibly make of them. Of course 
Fenton had not come down to spend a stupid week in the 
country out of cousinly affection. Nora was but the 
means ; Koger's presumptive wealth and bounty were the 
end. " He comes to make love to his cousm, and marry 
her if he can. I, who have done so much, will of course 
do more ; settle an income directly on the bride, make my 
will in her favor, and die at my earliest convenience ! 
How furious he most be," Eoger continued to meditate, 
*' to find me so young and hearty ! How furious he would 
be if he knew a Httle more ! " This hne of argument was 
justified in a manner by the frankness of Fenton's inti- 
mation that he was incapable of any other relation to a 
fact than a desire to turn it to pecuniary account. Roger 
was uneasy, yet he took a certain comfort in the belief 
that, thanks to his early lessons, Nora could be trusted 
to confine her cousin to the limits of cousinship. In 
whatever he might have failed, he had certainly taiiglit 
her to know a gentleman. Cousins are born, not made ; 



66 WATCH AND WARD. 

but lovers may be accepted at discretion. Nora's discre- 
tion, surely, would not be wanting. I may add also that, 
in his desire to order all things well, Roger caught him- 
self wondering whether, at the worst, a little precursory 
love-making would do any harm. The ground might be 
gently tickled to receive his own sowiug ; the petals of 
the young girPs nature, playfully forced apart, would 
leave the golden heart of the flower but the more acces- 
sible to his own vertical rays. 

It was cousinship for Nora, certainly ; but cousinship 
was much ; more than Roger fancied, luckily for his peace 
of mind. To a girl who had never had anything to boast 
of, this late-coming kinsman seemed a sort of godsend. 
Nora was so proud of turning out to have a cousin as 
well as other people, that she treated Eenton much better 
than other people treat their cousins. It must be said 
that Fenton was not altogether unworthy of her favors. 
He meant no especial harm to his fellow-men save in so 
far as he meant uncompromising benefit to himself. The 
Knight of La Mancha, on the torrid flats of Spain, never 
urged his gaunt steed witb a grimmer pressure of the 
knees than that with which Eenton held himself erect ou 
the hungry hobby of success. Shrewd as he was, he had 
perhaps, as well, a ray of Don Quixote's divine obliquity 
of vision. It is at least true that success as yet had been 
painfully elusive, and a part of the peril to Nora's girlish 
heart lay in this melancholy grace of undeserved failui*e. 
The young man's imagination was eager ; he had a gen- 
erous need of keeping too many irons on the fire. His 
invention was feeling rather jaded when he made over- 
tures to Roger. He had learned six months before of his 



WATCH AND WARD. 67 

cousin's situation, and had felt no great sentimental need 
of making her acquaintance ; but at last, revolving many 
things of a certain sort, he had come to wonder whether 
these lucky mortals could not be induced to play into his 
hands. Roger*s wealth (which lie largely overestimated) 
and Roger's obvious taste for sharing it with other peo- 
ple, Nora's innocence and Nora's prospects, — it would 
surely take a great fool not to pluck the rose from so 
thomless a tree. He foresaw these good things melting 
and trickling into the empty channel of his own fortune. 
Exactly what use he meant to make of Nora he would 
have been at a loss to say. Plain matrimony might or 
might not be a prize. At any rate, it could do a clever 
mau no barm to have a rich girl foolishly in love with 
him. He turned, therefore, upon his charming cousin tlie 
softer side of his genius. He very soon began to see that 
he had never known so delightful a person, and indeed 
his growing sense of her sweetness bade fair to make him 
bungle his dishonesty. She was altogether sweet enough 
to be valued for herself. She represented something that 
he had never yet encountered. Nora was a young lady ; 
how she had come to it was one of the outer mysteries ; 
but there she was, consummate ! He made no point of a 
man being a gentleman ; in fact, when a man was a gen- 
tleman yon had rather to be one yourself, which did n't 
pay ; but for a woman to be a lady was plainly pure gain. 
He had wit enough to detect something extremely grate- 
ful in Nora's half-concessions, her reserve of freshness. 
Women, to him, had seemed mostly as cut flowers, bloom- 
ing awhile in the waters of occasion, but yielding no sec- 
ond or rarer satisfaction. Nora was expanding in the 



68 WATCH AND WAED. 

sunslime of her cousin's gallantry. She bad known so 
few young men that she had not learned to be fastidious, 
and Fenton represented to her fancy that great collective 
manhood from which Roger was excluded by his very 
virtues. He had an irresistible air of action, alertness, 
and purpose. Poor Roger lield one much less in sus- 
pense. She regarded her cousin with something of the 
thrilled attention which one bestows on the naked arrow, 
poised across the bow. He had, moreover, the inestimable 
merit of representing her own side of her situation. He 
very soon became sensible of this merit, and you may be 
sure he entertained her to the top of her bent. He gos- 
siped by the hour about her father, and gave her very 
plainly to understand tliat poor Mr. Lambert had been 
more sinned against than sinning. 

Nora was not slow to perceive that Roger had no love 
for their guest, and she immediately conceded him his 
right of judgment, thinking it natural that they should 
quarrel about her a little. Eenton's presence was a tacit 
infringement of Roger's prescriptive right of property. 
If ber cousin had only never come ! This miglit have 
been, though she could not bring herself to wish it. Nora 
felt vaguely that here was a chance for tact, for the 
woman's peace-making art. To keep Roger in spirits, 
she put on a dozen unwonted graces ; she waited on him, 
appealed to him, smiled at him with unwearied iteration. 
But the main effect of these sweet offices was to make lier 
cousin think her the prettier. Roger's rancorous sus- 
picion transmuted to bitterness what would otherwise 
have been pure delight. She was turning hypocrite ; she. 
was throwing dust in his eyes ; she was plotting with that 



WATCH AND WARD. 69 

vulgar Missourian. Fenton, of course, was forced to ad- 
mit tliat he had reckoned without his host. Roger had 
had the impudence not to turn out a simpleton ; he was 
not a shepherd of the golden age ; he was a dogged mod- 
em, with prosy prejudices ; the wind of his favor blew 
as it listed. Fenton took the liberty of being extremely 
irritated at the other's want of ductility. " Hang the 
man ! " he said to himself, ** why can't he trust me ? 
What is he afraid of ? Why don't he take me as a friend 
rather than an enemy ? Let him be frank, and I will be 
frank. I could put him up to several things. And what 
does he want to do with Nora, any way ? " This latter 
question Fenton came very soon to answer, and the answer 
amused him not a little. It seemed to him an extremely 
odd use of one's time and capital, this fashioning of a 
wife to order. There was a long-winded patience about 
it, an arrogance of leisure, which excited his ire. Roger 
miglit surely have found hii fit ready made ! His disap- 
pointmenty a certain angry impulse to break a window, as 
it were, in Roger's hothouse, the sense finally that what 
he should gain he would gain from Nora alone, though 
indeed she was too confoundedly innocent to appreciate 
his pressing necessities, — these things combined to heat 
the young man's humor to the fever-point, and to make 
him strike more random blows than belonged to phiin 
prudence. 

The autumn being well advanced, the warmth of the 
sun had become very grateful. Nora used to spend much 
of the morning in strolling about the dismantled garden 
with her cousin. Roger would stand at the window with 
his honest face more nearly disfigured by a scowl than 



70 WATCH AND WARD. 

eyer before. It was the old, old story, to bis mind : 
nothing succeeds with women like just too little defer- 
ence. Fenton would lounge along by Nora's side, with 
bis hands in his pockets, a cigar in his mouth, his shoul- 
ders raised to bis ears, and a pair of tattered slippers on 
bis absurdly diminutive feet. Not only bad Nora for- 
given him this last breach of decency, but she had forth- 
with begun to work him a new pair of slippers. " What 
on earth," thought Roger, "do they find to talk about ? " 
Their conversation, meanwhile, ran in some sticb strain 
as this. 

"My dear Nora," said the young man, "what on 
earth, week in and week out, do you and Mr. Lawrence 
find to talk about?" 

"A great many things, George. We have lived long 
enough together to have a great many subjects of con- 
versation." 

" It was a most extraordinary thing, his adopting yon, 
if you don't mind my saying so. Imagine my adopting 
a little girl." 

" You and Roger are very different men." 

" We certainly are. What in the world did be expect 
to do with you?" 

"Very much what be has done, I suppose. He has 
educated me, he has made me what I am." 

"You're a very nice little person; but, upon mj 
word, I don't see that he 's to thank for it. A lovely 
girl can be neither made nor marred." 

" Possibly ! But I give you notice that I am not a 
lovely girl. I have it in me to be, under provocation, 
anything but a lovely girl. I owe everything to Roger. 



WATCH AND WARD. 71 

You must say nothing against him. I will not allow it. 
What would have become of me — " She stopped, be- 
trayed by her glance and voice. 

*^ Mr. Lawrence is a model of all the virtues, I admit ! 
But, Nora, I confess I am jealous of him. Does he ex- 
pect to educate you forever ? You seem to me to have 
already all the learning a pretty woman needs. What 
does he know about women ? What does he expect to 
do with you two or three years hence ? Two or three 
years hence you will be number one." And Fenton 
began to whistle with vehement gayety, executing with 
shuffling feet a momentary fandango. " Twct or three 
years hence, when you look in tlie glass, remember I said 
so!" 

" He means to go to Europe one of these days," said 
Nora, irrelevantly. 

** One of these days ! One would think he expects to 
keep you forever. Not if I can help it. And why 
Europe, in the name of all that 's patriotic ? Europe be 
hanged ! You ought to come out to your own section of 
the country, and see your own people. I can introduce 
you to the best society in St. Louis. I, '11 tell you what, 
my dear. You don't know it, but you're a regular 
Western girl." 

A certain foolish gladness in being the creature thus 
denominated prompted Nora to a gush of momentary 
laughter, of which Roger, within the window, caught 
the soundless ripple. "You oug)it to know, George," 
she said, " you are Western enough yourself." 

" Of course I am. I glory in it. It 's the only place 
for a man of ideas 1 In the West you can do something! 



72 WATCH AND WARD. 

Koand here you *re all stuck fast in ten feet of varnisli. 
For yourself, Nora, at bottom you 're all right ; but super- 
ficially you 're just a trifle overstarcbed. But we '11 take 
it out of you 1 It comes of living with a stiff-necked — " 

Nora bent for a moment ber lustrous eyes on tbe 
young man, as if to recall him to order. "I beg you to 
understand, once for all," she said, "that I refuse to 
listen to disrespectful allusions to Roger." 

" I '11 say it again, just to make you look at me so. 
If I ever fall in love with you, it will be when you are 
scolding me. All I have got to do is to attack your 
papa—", 

'' He is not my papa. I have had one papa ; that 's 
enough. I say it in all respect." 

" If he is not your papa, what is he P He is a dog in 
the manger. He must be either one thing or the other. 
When you are very little older, you will understand 
that." 

" He may be whatever thing you please. I shall be 
but one, — his best friend." 

Penton laughed with a kind of fierce hilarity. " You 
are so innocent, my dear, that one does n't know where 
to take you. Do you expect to marry him ? " 

Nora stopped in the path, with her eyes on her cousin. 
For a moment he was lialf confounded by their startled 
severity and the flush of pain in her cheek. "Marry 
Roger ! " slie said, with great gravity. 

" Why, he 's a man. after all 1 " 

Nora was silent a moment ; and then with a certain 
forced levity, walking on : "I had better wait till I am 
asked." 



WATCH AND WARD. 73 



" He will ask you ! You will see." 
" If he does, I sball be surprised." 



You will pretend to be. Women always do." 

" He has known me as a child," she continued, heed- 
less of his sarcasm. "I shall always be a child, for 
him." 

'*He will like that," said Fenton. "He will like a 
child of twenty." 

Nora, for an instant was lost in meditation. " As re- 
gards marriage," she said at last, quietly, "I will do 
what Koger wishes." 

Fenton lost patience. " Roger be hanged ! " he cried. 
"You are not his slave. You must choose for yourself 
• and act for yourself. Yqu must obey your own heart. 
You don't kngw what you are talking about. One of 
these days your heart will say its say. Then we shall see 
what becomes of Roger's wishes ! If he wants to make 
what he pleases of you, he should have taken you 
younger,' — or older! Don't tell me seriously that you 
can ever love (don't play upon words : love, I mean, in 
the one sense that means anything !) such a solemn little 
fop as that ! Don't protest, my dear girl ; I must have 
my say. I speak in your own interest ; I speak, at any 
rate, from my own heart. I detest the man. I came 
here perfectly on the square, and he has treated me as if 
I were n't fit to touch with tongs. I am poor, I have 
my way to make, I ain't fashionable ; but I 'm an honest 
man, for all that, and as good as he, take me altogether. 
Why can't he show me a moment's frankness ? Why 
can't he take me by the hand, and say, * Come, young 
man^ I 'ye got capital, and you 've got brains ; let 's pull 



74 WATCH AND WARD. 

together a stroke?' Does he think I want to steal his 
spoons or pick his pocket? Is that hospitality? It *s a 
poor kind." 

This passionate outbreak, prompted in about equal 
measure by baffled ambition and wounded conceit, made 
sad havoc with Nora's loyalty to her friend. Her sense 
of natural property in her cousin, — the instinct of free 
affection alternating more gratefully than she knew with 
the dim consciousness of measured dependence, — had 
become in her heart a sort of sweet excitement. It made 
her feel that Roger's mistrust was cruel ; it was doubly 
cruel that George should 'feel it. Two angry men, at 
any rate, were quarrelling about her, and she must avert 
an explosion. She promised herself to dismiss Fenton 
the next day. Of course, by the very fact of this conces- 
sion, Roger lost ground with her, and George acquired 
the grace of the persecuted. Meanwhile, Roger's jealous 
irritation came to a head. On the evening following the 
little scene I have narrated the young couple sat by the 
fire in the library ; Peuton on a stool at his cousin's feet 
holding, while Nora wound them on reels, the wools 
which were to be applied to the manufacture of those 
iuvidious slippers. Roger, after grimly watching their 
mutual amenities for some time over the cover of a book, 
unable to master his fierce discomposure, departed with a 
telltale stride. They heard him afterwards walking up 
and down the piazza, where he was appealing from his 
troubled nerves to the ordered quietude of the stars. 

" He hates me so," said Fenton, " that I believe if I 
were to go out there he would draw a knife." 

" O George ! " cried Nora, horrified. 



WATCH AND WABD. 75 

; " It 's a fact, my dear. I am afraid you '11 have to 
give me up. I wish I had never seen you ! " 

" At all events, we can write to each other." 

" What 's writing ? I don't know how to write 1 I 
will, though! I suppose he will open my letters. So 
much the worse for him ! " 

Nora, as slie wound her wool, mused intently. " I 
can't believe he really grudges me our friendship. It 
must be something else." 

Penton, with a clench of his fist, arrested suddenly th^ 
outflow:.of the skein from his hand. " It is something 
else," he said. " It *s our possible — more than frielid- 
ship ! " And he grasped her two hands in his own. 
" Nora, choose 1 Between me and him ! " 

She stared a moment ; then her eyes filled with tears. 
"O George," she cried, "you make me very unhappy." 
She must certainly tell him to go; and yet that very 
movement of his which had made it doubly needful made 
it doubly hard. " I will talk to Roger," she said. " No 
one should be condemned unheard. We may all misun- 
derstand each other." 

Fenton, half an hour later, having, as he said, letters 
to write, went up to his own room ; shortly after which, 
Roger returned to the Hbrary. Half an hour's com- 
munion with the starlight and the ringing crickets had 
drawn the sting from his irritation. There came to him, 
too, a mortifying sense of his guest having outdone him 
in civility. This would never do. He took refuge in 
imperturbable good-humor, and entered the room in high 
indifiference. But even before he had spoken, something 
in Nora's face caused this wholesome dose of resigna- 



76 WATCH AND WARD. 

tion to stick in his throat. " Your cousin is gone P " he 
said. 

" To his own room. He has some letters to write." 

" Shall I hold your wools ? " Roger asked, after a 
pause. • 

" Thank you. They are all wound." 

" For whom are your slippers P " He knew, of course ; 
but the question came. 

" For George. Did I not tell you P Do you think 
them pretty ? '* And she held up her work. 

" Prettier than he deserves." 

Nora gave him a rapid glance and miscounted her 
stitch. " You don't like poor George," she said. 

" No. Since you ask me, I don't like poor George." 

Nora was silent. At last : " Well ! " she said, " you 've 
not the same reasons as I have." 

" So I am bound to believe ! You must have excel- 
lent reasons." 

" Excellent. He is my own, you know." 

" Your own — P Ah ! " And he gave a little laugh. 

" My own cousin," said Nora. 

"Your own grandfather!" cried Roger. 

Slie stopped her work. " What do you mean P " she 
asked gravely. 

Roger began to blush a little. "I mean — I mean — 
that I don't believe in your cousin. He does n't satisfy 
me. I don't like him. He contradicts himself, his story 
does n't hang together. I have nothing but his word. I 
am not bound to take it." 

" Roger, Roger," said Nora, with great softness, " do 
you mean that he is an impostor P '^ 



WATCH AND WAKD. 77 

" The word is your own. He 's not an honest man." 

She slowly rose from her little bench, gathering her 
work into the skirt of her dress. " And, doubting of his 
honesty, you have let liim take up his abode here, you 
have let him become dear to me P " 

She was making him ten times a fool ! '' Why, if you 
liked him," he said. ** When did I ever refuse you any- 
thing ? " 

There came upon Nora a sudden uiipitying sense that 
!Roger was ridiculous. ''Honest or not honest,'' she 
said with vehemence, "I do like him. Cousin or no 
cousin, he is my friend." 

" Very good. But I warn you. - I don't enjoy talking 
to you thus. Only let me tell you, once for all, that 
your cousm, your friend — your — whatever he is ! " — 
He faltered an instant ; Nora's eyes were fixed on him. 
" That he disgusts me ! " 

" You are extremely unjust You have taken no trouble 
to know him. You have treated him from the first with 
small civility ! " 

" Was the trouble to be all mine ? Civility ] he never 
missed it ; he does n't know what it means." 

"He knows more than you think. But we must 
talk no more about him." She rolled together her can- 
vas and reels ; and then suddenly, with passionate incon- 
sequence, " Poor, poor George ! " she cried. 

Roger watched her a moment ; then he said bitterly, 
" You disappoint me." 

" You must have formed great hopes of me ! " she 
answered. 

" I confess I had." 



78 WATCH AND WARD. 



it 



Say good by to tbem thfen, Roger, li tliis is 
wrong, I am all wrong I" She spoke with a proud 
decision, which was very becoming ; she had never yet 
come so near being beautiful. In the midst of his pas- 
sionate vexation Roger admired her. Tbe scene seemed 
for a moment a bad dream, from which, with a start, he 
might wake up to tell her he loved her. 

" Your anger gives an admirable poi^t to your re- 
marks. Indeed, it gives a beauty to your face. Must a 
young lady be in the wrong to be attractive P ** he went 
on, hardly knowing what he said. But a burning blush 
in her cheeks recalled him to a kind of self-abhorrence. 
" Would to God," he- cried, " your abominable cousin 
had never come between us ! " 

'* Between us ? He is not between us. I stand as 
near you, Roger, as I ever did. Of course George will 
go away immediately." 

** Of course ! I am not so sure. He will^ I suppose^ 
if he is asked." 

"Of course I shall ask him." 

" Nonsense. You will not enjoy that." 

"We are old friends by this time," said Nora, with 
terrible irony. " I shall not in the least mind." • 

Roger could have choked himself. He had brought 
his case to this : Eeuton a martyred prescript, and Nora 
a broodiug victim of duty. "Do I want to turn the 
man out of the house ? " he cried. " Do me a favor — 
I insist upon it. Say nothing to him, let him stay as 
long as he chooses. I am not afraid ! I don't trust him, 
but I trust you. I am curious to see how long he will 
have the impudence to stay. A fortnight hence I shall 



WATCH AND WAKD. 79 

be justified. You will say to me, 'Roger, you were 
right. George is not a gentleman.' There I I insist." 

"A gentleman? Really, what are we talking about? 
Do you mean that he wears a false diamond in his shirt ? 
He will take it off if I ask him. There 's a long way be- 
tween wearing false diamonds — '* 

** And stealing real ones ! I don't know. I have al- 
ways fancied they go together. At all events, Nora, he 
is not to suspect that he has been able to make trouble 
between two old friends." 

Nora stood for a moment in irresponsive meditation. 
"I think he means to go," she said. " If you want him 
to stay, you must ask him." And without further words 
she marched out of the room. Roger followed her with 
bis eyes. He thought of Lady Castlewood in " Henry 
Esmond," who looked " devilish handsome in a passion." 

Lady Castlewood, meanwhile, ascended to her own 
room, flung her work upon the floor, and, dropping into 
a chair, betook herself to weeping. It was late before she 
slept. She awoke with a new consciousness of the bur- 
den of life.- Her own burden certainly was small, but 
her strength, as yet, was untested. She had thought, in 
ber many reveries, of a possible disagreement with Roger, 
and prayed that it might never come by a fault of hers. 
The fault was hers now in that she had surelv cared less 
for duty than for joy. Roger, indeed, had shown a piti- 
ful smallness of view. This was a weakness ; but who 
was she, to keep account of Roger's weaknesses? It 
"was to a weakness of Roger's that she owed her food and 
raiment and shelter. It helped to quench her resent- 
ment that she felt, somehow, that, whether Roger smiled 



80 WATCH AND WARD. 

or frowned, George would still be George. He was not 
a gentleman : well and good ; neither was she, for that 
matter, a lady. But a certain manful hardness like 
George's would. not be amiss in the man one was to love. 

A simpler sonl than Fenton's might have guessed at 
the trouble of this quiet household. Fenton read in it 
AS well an omen of needful departure. He accepted the 
necessity with an acute sense of failure, — almost of in- 
jury. He had gained nothing but the bother of being 
loved. It was a bother, because it gave him an unwonted 
sense of responsibility. It seemed fx) fling upon all things 
a dusky shade of prohibition. Yet the matter had its 
brightness, too, if a man could but swallow his supersti- 
tions. He cared for Nora quite enough to tell her he 
loved her ; he had said as much, with an easy conscience, 
to girls for whom he cared far less. He felt gratefully 
enough the cool vestment of tenderness which she had 
spun about him, like a web of imponderable silver ; but 
he had other uses for his time than to go masquerading 
through Nora's fancy. The defeat of his hope that 
Roger, like a testy old uncle in a comedy, would shower 
blessiugs and bank-notes upon his union with his cousin, 
involved the discomfiture of a secondary project; the 
design, namely, of borrowing five thousand dollars. The 
reader will smile ; but such is the simplicity of " smart 
men." He would content himself now with five hun- 
dred. In this collapse of his visions he fell a-musing 
upon Nora's financial value. 

" Look here," he said to her, with an air of heroic 
effort, " I see I 'm in the way. I must be off." 

" I am sorry, George," said Nora, sadly. 



WATCH AND WARD. 81 



it 



So am I. I never supposed T was proud. But I 
reckoned without mj host I " he said with a bitter laugh. 
" I wish I had never come. Or rather I don't. It is 
worth it all to know you." 

She began to question him soothingly about his pro- 
jects and prospects ; and hereupon, for once, Fenton bent 
bis mettle to simulate a pathetic incapacity. He set forth 
that he was discouraged ; the future was a blank. It 
was child's play, attempting to do anything without capi- 
tal. 

" And you have no capital ? " said Nora, anxiously. 

Fenton gave a poignant smile. " Why, my dear girl, 
I 'm a poor man ! " 

" How poor ? *' 

" Poor, poor, poor. Poor as a rat." 

" You don't mean that you are penniless ? " 

" What is the use of my telling you ? You can't help 
me. Aud it would only make you unhappy." 

" If you are unhappy, I want to be ! " 

This golden vein of sentiment might certainly be 
worked. Penton took out his pocket-book, drew from 
it four bank-notes of five dollars each, aud ranged them 
witli a sort of mournful playfulness in a line on his knee. 
" That 's my fortune." 

** Do you mean to say that twenty dollars is all you 
have in the world ? " 

Fenton smoothed out the creases, caressingly, in the 
soiled and crumpled notes. " It 's a great shame to bring 
you down to a poor man's secrets," he said, ** Fortune 
has raised you above them." 

Nora's heart began to beat. " Yes, it has. I have a 
little money, George. Some eighty dollars." 



/ 



82 WATCH AND WARD. 

Eighty dollars! George suppressed a groan. "He 
keeps you rather low." 

" Why, I have very little use for money, and no chance, 
here in the country, to spend it. Roger is extremely 
generous. Every few weeks he makes me take some. I 
often give it away to the j)oor people hereabouts. Only 
a fortnight ago I refused to take any more on account of 
my still having this. It *s agreed between us that I may 
give what I please in charity, and that my charities are 
my own affair. If I had only known of you, George, I 
should have appointed you my pensioner-in-chief." 

George was silent. He was wondering intently how 
he might arrange to become the standing recipient of 
her overflow. Suddenly he remembered that he ought to 
protest. But Nora had lightly quitted the room. Fen- 
ton repocketed his twenty dollars and awaited her reap- 
pearance. Eighty dollars were not a fortune; still they 
were eighty dollars. To his great annoyance, before Nora 
returned Roger presented himself. The young man felt 
for an instant as if he had been caught in an act of sen- 
timental burglary, and made a movement to conciliate his 
detector. " I am afraid I must bid you good by," he said. 

Roger frowned, and wondered whether Nora had spoken. 
At this moment she reappeared, flushed and out of breath 
with the excitement of her purpose. She had been count- 
ing over her money, and held in each hand a little flutter- 
ing package of bank-notes. On seeing Roger she stopped 
and blushed, exchanging with her cousin a rapid glance 
of inquiry. He almost glared at her, whether with warn- 
ing or with menace she hardly knew. Roger stood look- 
ing at her, half amazed. Suddenly, as the meaning of 



WATCH AND WARD. 83 

her errand flashed upon him, he turned a furious crim- 
son. He made a step forward, hut cautioned himself; 
then, folding his arms, he silently waited. Nora, after a 
moment's hesitation, rolling her notes together, came up 
to her cousin and held out the little package. Eeuton 
kept his hands in his pockets and devoured her with his 
eyes. " What 's all this ? '* he said brutally. 

"0 George!" cried Nora; and her eyes filled with 
tears. 

Roger had divined the situation ; the shabby victimiza- 
tion of the young girl and her kinsman's fury at the dis- 
closure of his avidity. He was angry ; but he was even 
more disgusted. From so vulgar a knave there was lit- 
tle rivalship to fear. " I am afraid I am rather a mar- 
plot," he said. " Don't insist, Nora. Wait till my back 
is turned." 

'' I have nothing to be ashamed of," said Nora. 

" You ^ O, nothing whatever 1 " cried Roger with a 
laugh. 

Eenton stood leaning against the mantel-piece, desper- 
ately sullen, with a look of vicious confusion. "It is 
only I who have anything to be ashamed of," he said at 
last, bitterly, with an effort. " My poverty ! " 

Roger smiled graciously. " Honest poverty is never 
shameful \ " 

Fenton gave him an insolent stare. " Honest poverty ! 
You know a great deal about it." 

" Don't appeal to poor little Nora, man, for her sav- 
ings," Roger went on. " Come to me." 

" You are unjust," said Nora. ** He did n't appeal to 
me. I appealed to him. I guessed his poverty. He 
lias only twenty dollars in the world." 



84 WATCH AND WARD. 

" O you poor little fool ! " roared Fenton's eyes. 

Roger was delighted. At a single stroke be might re- 
deem his incivility and reinstate himself in Nora's affec- 
tions. He took out his f)ocket-book. "Let me help 
you. It was very stupid of me not to have guessed your 
embarrassment." And he counted out a dozen notes. 

Nora stepped to her cousin's side and passed her hand 
through his arm. " Don't be proud/' she murmured ca- 
ressingly. 

. Roger's notes were new and crisp. Fenton looked 
hard at the opposite wall, but, explain it who can, he read 
• their successive figures, — a fifty, four twenties, six tens. 
He could have howled. 

" Come, don't be proud," repeated Roger, holding out 
this little bundle of wealth. 

Two great passionate tears welled into the young man's 
eyes. The sight of Roger's sturdy sleekness,' of the com- 
fortable twinkle of patronage in his eye, was too much 
for him. " I shall not give you a chance to be proud," he 
said. "Take care I Your papers may go into the fire." 

" O George ! " murmured Nora ; and her murmur 
seemed to him delicious. 

He bent down his head, passed his arm round her 
shoulders, and kissed her on her forehead. " Good by, 
dearest Nora," he said. 

Roger stood staring, with his proffered gift. "You 
decline ? " he cried, almost defiantly. 

" * Decline * is not the word. A man does not decline 
an insult." 

Was Fen ton, then, to have the best of it, and was his 
own very generosity to be turned agamst him P Blindly, 



WATCH AND WARD. 85 

passionately, Roger crumpled the notes into his fist and 
tossed them into the fire. In an instant they began to 
blaze. 

" Roger, are you mad ? " cried Nora. And she made 
a movement to rescue the crackling paper. Fenton burst 
into a laugh. He caught her by the arm, clasped her 
round the waist, and forced her to stand and watch the 
brief blaze. Pressed against his side, she felt the quick 
beating of his heart. As the notes disappeared her eyes 
sought Roger's face. He looked at her stupidly, and then 
turning on his heel he walked out of the room. Her 
cousin, still holding her, showered upon her forehead half 
a dozen fierce kisses. But disengaging herself — " You 
must leave the house ! " she cried. " Something dreadful 
will happen." 

Fentou had soon packed his valise, and Nora, mean- 
while, had ordered a vehicle to carry him to the station. 
She waited for him in the portico. When he came out, 
with his bag in his hand, she offered him again her little 
roll of bills. But he was a wiser man than half an hour 
before. He took them, turned them over, and selected a 
one-dollar note. " I will keep this," he said, " in remem- 
brance, and only spend it for my last diniier." She made 
him promise, however, that if trouble really overtook him, 
he would let her know, and in any case he would write. 
As the wagon went over the crest of an adjoining hill he 
stood up and waved his hat. His tall, gaunt young figure, 
as it rose dark against the cold November sunset, cast a 
cooling shadow across the fount of her virgin sympathies. 
Such was the outline, surely, of the conquering hero, not 
of the conquered. Her fancy followed him forth into the 
world with a sense of comradeship. 



i qnarrd with his young comptinton, if 

rijiunTe] it was, was uuver repaired. It liad scat- 
tered its seed ; tbc; were left Ifing, to be absorbed 
iu the conscious soil or dispersed b; some beuiguaut 
breeze of accident, us destiny might appoint. But as ai 
mauuer of clearing the air uf its thuuder, Koger, a week 
after Feuton's departure, proposed she shpuld go with 
him for a fortnight to town. Later, perliaps, the; iniglit 
arraiige to remain for the winter. Nora bad been hing- 
ing vaguely for the relief of a change of circnmstances ; 
she assented witli great good-will. They lodged at an 
hotel, — not tlie establish tnent at which they had made ac- 
quaintance. Here, late in the aftemoou, Ihe day after their 
arrival, Nora sat by the window, waiting for Roger to oome 
and take her to dinner, and watching with the inteutuess of 
country eyes the hurrying throng in the street; thinking 
too at moments of a certain blue bonnet she had boiiglit 
that morning, and comparing it, not uucomplacently, with 
the transitory bonnets on the pavement. A gentleman 
was introduced ; Nora had not fui^tten Hubert Law- 
rence. Hubert had occupied for more than a year past 
a pastoral office in the West, aud had recently bad little 



WATCH AND WARD. 87 

communication with liis cousin. Nora he had seen but 
ou a single occasion, that of his visit to Roger, six 
months after her advent. She had grown in the interval, 
from tiie little girl who slept with the " Child's Own 
Book " under her pillow and . dreamed of the Prince 
Avenant, into a lofty maiden who reperused the " Heir 
of Redcliffe," and mused upon the loves of the clergy. 
Hubert, too, had changed in his own degree. He was 
now thirty-one years of age, and his character had lost 
something of a certain boyish vagueness of outline, which 
formerly had not been without its grace. But his elder 
grace was scarcely less effective. Various possible half- 
shadows in his personality had melted into broad, shallow 
lights. He was now, distinctly, one of the Kght-armed 
troops of the army of the Lord. He fought the Devil as 
an irresponsible skirmisher, not as a sturdy gunsman 
planted beside a boonling sixty-pounder. The clerical 
cloth, as Hubert wore it, was not unmitigated sable ; and 
in spite of his cloth, such as it was, humanity rather 
than divinity got the lion's share of his attentions. He 
loved doubtless, in this world, the heavenward face of 
things, but he loved, as regards heaven, the earthward. 
He was rather an idler in the walks of theology, and he was 
uncommitted to any very rigid convictions. He thought 
the old theological positions in very bad taste, but he 
thought the new theological negations in no taste at all. 
In fact, Hubert believed so vaguely and languidly in the 
Devil that there was but slender logic in his having un- 
dertaken the cure of souls. He administered his spiritual 
medicines in homoeopathic doses. It had been mali- 
ciously said that he had turned parson because parsons 



88 WATCH AND WARD. 

enjoy peculiar advantages in approacbing the fair sex. 
The presumption is in their favor. Our business, how- 
ever, is not to pick up idle reports. Hubert was, on the 
whole, a decidedly light weight, and yet his want of 
spiritual passion was by no means, in effect, a want of 
motive or stimulus; for the central pivot of his beiug 
continued to operate with the most noiseless precision 
and regularity, — the slim, erect, inflexible Ego. To the 
eyes of men, and especially to the eyes of women, what- 
ever may have been the moving cause, the outer mani- 
festation was very agreeable. If Hubert had no great 
firmness of faith, he had a very pretty firmness of man- 
ner. He was gentle without timidity, frank without ar- 
rogance, clever without pedantry. The common measure 
of clerical disallowance was reduced in his hands to the 
tacit protest of a generous personal purity. His appear- 
ance bore various wholesome traces of the practical les- 
sons of his Western pastorate. Tliis had not been to his 
taste ; he had had to apply himself, to devote himself, to 
compromise with a hundred aversions. His talents had 
been worth less to him than he expected, and he had been 
obliged, as the French say, to payer de sa personne, — that 
person for which he entertained so delicate a respect. All 
this had given him a slightly jaded, overwearied look, 
certain to deepen his interest in feminine eyes. He had 
actually a couple of fine wrinkles in his seraphic forehead. 
He secretly rejoiced in his wrinkles. They were his crown 
of glory. He had suffered, he had worked, he had been 
bored. Now he believed in earthly compensations. 
" Dear me ! " he said, " can this be Nora Lambert P " 
She had risen to meet him, and held out her hand with 



WATCH AND WAED. 89 

girlish frankness. She was dressed in a light silk dress ; 
she seemed a young woman grown. " I have been grow- 
ing hard in all these years/' she said. " I have had to 
catch up with those pieds enormes*' The readers will not 
have forgotten that Hubert had thus quahfied her lower 
members. Ignorant as she was, at the moment, of the 
French tongue, her memory had instinctively retained 
the words, and she had taken an early opportunity to 
look out pied in the dictionary, llnorme, of course, spoke 
for itself. 

" You must have cauglit np with them now/' Hubert 
said, laughing. "You are an enormous young lady. 
I should never have known you." He sat down, asked 
various questions about Roger, and adjured her to tell 
him, as he said, " all about herself." Tiie invitation was 
flattering, but it met only a partial compliance. Uncon- 
scious as yet of her own charm, Nora was oppressed by 
a secret admiration of her companion, whose presence 
seemed to open a brilliaut vista. She compared him with 
her cousin, and wondered that he should be at once so 
impressive and so different. She blushed a little, pri- 
vately, for Fenton, and was not ill pleased to think he was 
absent. In the light of Hubert's good manners, his ad- 
mission that he was no gentleman acquired an excessive 
force. By this thrilling intimation of the diversity of the 
male sex, the mental pinafore of childhood seemed finally 
dismbsed. Hubert was so frank and friendly, so ten- 
derly and gallantly patronizing, that more than ouce she 
felt herself beginning to expand ; but then, suddenly, 
something absent in the tone of his assent, a vague fancy 
that^ in the gathering dusk, he was looking at her all at 



90 WATCH AND WARD. 

Lis ease, rather tban listening to her, conyerted her 
bravery into what she knew to be deplorable little-girlish- 
ness. On the whole, this interview may have passed for 
Nora's first lesson in the art, indispensable to a young 
lady on the threshold of society, of talking for half an 
hour without saying anything. The lesson was inter- 
rupted by the arrival of Roger, who greeted his cousin 
with almost, extravagant warmth, and insisted upon his 
staying to dinner. Roger was to take Nora after dinner 
to a concert, for which he felt no great enthusiasm p he 
proposed to Hubert, who was a musical man, to occupy 
his place. Hubert demurred awhile ; but in the mean- 
time Nora, having gone to prepare lierself, reappeared, 
looking extremely well in the blue crape bonnet before 
mentioned, with her face bright with anticipated pleasure. 
For a moment Roger was vexed at having resigned his 
office ; Hubert immediately stepped into it. Tiiey came 
home late, the blue bonnet nothing the worse for wear, 
and the young girl's face lighted up by her impressions. 
Her animation was extreme ; she treated Roger ,to a rep- 
resentation of the concert, and made a great show of 
voice. Her departing childishness, her dawning tact, 
her freedom with Roger, her half-freedom with Hubert, 
made a charming mixture, and insured for her auditors 
the success of the entertainment. When she had retired, 
amid a mimic storm of applause from the two gentlemen, 
Roger solemnly addressed his cousin. " Well, what do 
you think of her P I hope you have no fault to find with 
her feet." 

** I have had no observation of her feet," said Hubert ; 
** but she will have very handsome hands. She is a very 



WATCH AND WARD. 91 

nice creature." Roger sat lounging in his clmir with his 
hauds in his pockets, his chin on his breast, aud a heavy 
gaze fixed on Hubert. The latter was struck with his 
deeply preoccupied aspect. " But let us talk of you rather 
than of Nora," he said. " I have been waiting for a 
chance to tell you that you look very poorly." 

" Nora or I, — it 's all one. She is the only thing in 
life I care for." 

Hubert was startled by the sombre energy of his tone. 
The old polished, placid Roger was in abeyance. " My 
dear fellow," he said, " you are altogether wrong. Live 
for yourself. You may be sure she will do as much. You 
take it too hard." 

" Yes, I take it too hard. It troubles me." 

" What 's the matter ? Is she a naughty child ? Is 
she more than you bargained for ? " Roger sat gazing 
at him in silence, with the same grave eye. He began to 
suspect Nora had turned out a losing investment. Has 
she — a — low tastes ? " he went on. " Surely not with 
that sweet face ! " 

Roger started to his feet impatiently. " Don't misun- 
derstand me ! " he cried. " I have been longing to see 
some one, — to talk, — to get some advice, — some sym- 
pathy. I am fretting myself away." 

" Good heavens, man, give her a thousand dollars and 
send her back to her family. You have educated her." 

" Her family ! She has no family ! She 's the loneliest 
as well as the sweetest, wisest, best of creatures! If 
she were only a tenth as good, I should be a happier man. 
I can't think of parting with her ; not for all I possess." 

Hubert stared a moment. ** Why, you are in love." 



92 WATCH AND WARD. 

** Yes," said Koger^ blusbing. " I am in love.'* 

** Dear me ! " mannured Hubert. 

'* I am not ashamed of it," rejoined Roger, softly. 

It was no business of Hubert's, certainly ; but he felt 
the least bit disappointed. " Well," he said coolly^ " why 
don't you marry her ? " 

" It is not so simple as that ! '* 

" She will not have you ? " 

Koger frowned impatiently. '* Reflect a moment. You 
pretend to be a man of delicacy." 

" You mean she is too young P Nonsense. If you are 
sure of her, the younger the better." 

"For my unutterable misery," said Roger, "I have a 
conscience. I wish to leave her free and take the risk. 
I wish to be just and let the matter work it.self out. 
You may think me absurd, but I wish to be loved for my- 
self, as other men are loved." 

It was a specialty of Hubert's that in proportion as 
other people grew hot, he grew cool. To keep cool, 
morally, in a heated medium was, in fact, for Hubert a 
peculiar satisfaction. He broke into a long light laugh. 
" Excuse me," he said, '* but there is something ludicrous 
in your attitude. What business has a lover with a con- 
science ? None at all ! That 's why I keep out of it. 
It seems to me your prerogative to be downright. If you 
waste any more time in hair-splitting, you will find your 
young lady has taken things in the lump ! " 

"Do you really think there is danger?" Roger de- 
manded, pitifully. " Not yet awhile. She 's only a child. 
Tell me, rather, is she only a child P You have spent the 
evening beside her : how does she strike a stranger P 



» 



WATCH AND WARD. 93 

While Hubert's answer lingered on his lips, the door 
opened and Nora came in. Her eri-and was to demand 
the use of Roger's watch-key, her own having mysteri- 
ously vanished. She had begun to take out her pins and 
had muffled herself for this excursion in a merino dressing- 
gown of sombre blue. Her hair was gathered for tCe 
night into a single massive coil, which had been loosened 
by the rapidity of her flight along the passage. Roger's 
key proved a complete misfit, so that she had recourse to 
Hubert's. It hung on the watch-chain which depended 
from his waistcoat, and some rather intimate fumbling 
was needed to adjust it to Nora's diminutive timepiece. 
It worked admirably, and she stood looking at him with 
a little smile of caution as it creaked on the pivot. '* I 
would not have troubled you," she said, " but that with- 
out my watch I should oversleep myself. You know 
Roger's temper, and what I should suffer if I were late 
for breakfast ! " 

Roger was ravished at this humorous sally, and when, 
on making her escape, she clasped one hand to her Iiead 
to support her released tresses, and hurried along the 
corridor with the other confining the skirts of her inflated 
robe, he kissed his hand after her with more than jocular 
good-will. 

" Ah ! it 's as bad as that ! " said Hubert, shaking his 
head. 

" I had no idea she had such hair," murmured Roger. 
** You are right, it is no case for shilly-shallying." 

" Take care ! " said Hubert. " She is only a child." 

Roger looked at him a moment. "My dear fellow, 
you are a hypocrite." 



94 WATCH AND WARD. 

Hubert colored the least bit, and then took up bis bat 
and began to smooth it with his handkerchief. " Not at 
all. See how frank I can be. I recommend you to marry 
the young lady and have done with it. If you wait, it 
will be at your own risk. I assure you I think she is 
charming, and if I am not mistaken, this is only a hint of 
future possibilities. Don't sow for others to reap. If 
you think the harvest is not ripe, let it ripen in milder 
sunbeams than these vigorous hand>kisses. Lodge her. 
with some proper person and go to Europe ; come home 
from Paris a year heuce with her trousseau in your trunks, 
and I will perform the ceremony without another fee than 
the prospect of having an adorable cousin." With these 
words Hubert left his companion pensive. 

His words reverberated in Roger's mind ; I may almost 
say that they rankled. A couple of days later, in the 
hope of tenderer counsel, he called upon our friend Mrs. 
Keith. This lady had completely rounded the cape of 
matrimony, and was now buoyantly at anchor in the placid 
cove of well-dowered widowhood. You have heard many 
a young unmarried lady exclaim with a bold sweep of 
conception, " Ah me ! I wish I were a widow ! ** Mrs. 
Keith was precisely the widow that young unmarried 
ladies wish to be. With her diamonds in her dressing- 
case and her carriage in her stable, and without a feather's 
weight of encumbrance, she oifered a finished example 
of satisfied ambition. Her wants had been definite; these 
once gratified, she had not presumed further. She was a 
very much worthier woman than in those hungry virginal 
days when Ex)ger had wooed her. Prosperity had agreed 
equally well with her beauty and her temper. The wrin- 



WATCH AND WARD, 95 

kles on her. brow bad stood still, like Josbua's sun, and a 
host of good intentions and fair promises seemed to illu- 
minate her person. Roger, as be stood before her, not 
only felt tbat bis passion was incurably defunct, but al- 
lowed bimself to doubt that this veuve consolee would 
have made an ideal wife. The lady, mistaking his em- 
barrassment for the fumes of smouldering ardor, deter- 
mined to transmute his devotion by the subtle chemistry 
of friendship. This she found easy work ; in ten minutes 
the echoes of the past were hushed in the small-talk of 
the present. Mrs. Keith was on the point of sailing for 
!EIurope, and had much to say of her plans and arrange- 
ments, — of the miserable rent she was to get for her 
house. " Why should n't one turn an honest penny ? ' 
she asked. " And now," she went on, when the field had 
been cleared, " tell me about the young lady." This 
was precisely what Roger wished ; but just as he was 
about to begin his story there came an irruption of visitors, 
fatal to the confidential. Mrs. Keith found means to take 
bim aside. " Seeing is better than hearing," she said, 
" and I am dying to see her. Bring her this evening to 
dinner, and we shall have her to ourselves." 

Mrs. Keith had long been for Nora an object of mys- 
tical veneration. Roger had been in the habit of alluding 
to her, not freely nor frequently, but with a certain im- 
plicit consideration which more than once bad set Nora 
wondering. She entered the lady's drawing-room that 
evening with an oppressive desire to please. The inter- 
est, manifested by Roger in the question of what she 
sliould wear assured her that he had staked a nameless 
something on the impression she might make. She was 



96 WATCH AND WAKD. 

not only Teassnred, however, but altogether captivated, 
by the lavish cordiality of her hostess. Mrs. Keith kissed 
her on both cheeks, held her at her two arms' length, 
gave a twist to the fall of her sash, and made her feel 
very plainly that she was being inspected and appraised. 
All this was done, however, with a certain flattering light 
in the eye and a tender matronly smile ivhich rather in- 
creased than diminished the young girl's composure. 
Mrs. Keith was herself so elegant, so finished, so fra- 
grant of taste and sense, that before an hour was over 
Nora felt that she had borrowed the hint of a dozen in- 
dispensable graces. After dinner her hostess bade her 
sit down to the piano. Here, feeling sure of her ground, 
Nora surpassed herself. Mrs. Keith beckoned to Roger 
to come and sit beside her on the sofa, where, as she nod- 
ded time to the music with her head, she softly conversed. 
Prosperity^ as I have intimated, had acted on her moral 
nature very much as a medicinal tonic — quinine or iron 
— acts upon the physical. She was in a comfortable 
glow of charity. She itched gently, she hardly knew 
where, — was it in heart or brain ? — to render some 
one a service. She had on hand a small capital of sen- 
timental patronage for which she desired a secure invest- 
ment. Here was her chance. The project which Roger 
had imparted to her three years before seemed to her, 
now she had taken Nora's measure, to contain such 
pretty elements of success that she deemed it a sovereign 
pity it should not be rounded into symmetry. She de- 
termined to lend an artistic hand. " Does she know it, 
that matter ? " she asked in a whisper. 
" I have never told her." 



WATCH AND WAED. 97 

" That *s right. I approve your delicacy. Of course 
you are sure of your case. She is altogether lovely, — 
she is one in a thousand. I really envy you ; upon my 
word, Mr. Lawrence, I am jealous. She has a style of 
her own. It is not quite beauty ; it is not quite clever- 
ness. It belongs neither altogether to her person, nor 
yet to her mind. It 's a kmd of way she has. It 's a 
way that may lead her far. She has pretty things, too ; 
one of these days she may take it into her head to be a 
beauty of beauties. Nature never meant her to hold up 
her head so well for nothing. Ah, how wrinkled and 
faded it makes one feel ! To be sixteen years old, with 
that head of hair, with health and good connections, with 
that amount of good-will at the piano, it 's the very best 
thing in the world, if they but knew it I But no ! they 
must leave it all behind them ; they must pull their hair 
to pieces ; they must get rid of their complexions ; they 
must be twenty; they must have lovers, and go their 
own gait. Well, since it must come, we must attend to 
the profits : they will take care of the pleasures. Give 
Nora to me for a year. She needs a woman, a wise 
woman, a woman like me. Men, when they undertake 
to meddle with a young girl's education, are veriest old 
grandmothers. Let me take her to Europe and bring 
her out in Rome. Don't be afraid ; I will guard your 
interests. I will bring you back the most charming girl 
in America. I see her from here ! " And describing a 
great curve in the air with her fan, Mrs. Keith inclined 
her head to one side in a manner suggestive of a milliner 
who descries in the bosom of futurity the ideal bonnet. 
Looking at Eoger, she saw that her point was gained ; 



98 WATCH AND WARD. 

and Nora, having just finished her piece, was accordingly 
summoned to the sofa and made to sit down at Mrs. 
Keith's feet. Roger went and stood before the fire. 
" My dear Nora," said Mrs. Keith, as if she had known 
her from childhood, " how should you like to go with me 
to Rome ? " 

Nora started to her feet, and stood looking open-eyed 
from one to the other. "Really?" she said. "Does 
Roger—" 

"Roger," said Mrs. Keith, "finds you so hard to 
manage that he has made you over to me. I forewarn 
you, I am a terrible woman. But if you are not afraid, 
I shall scold you and pinch you no harder than I would 
a daughter of my own." 

" I give you up for a year," said Roger. " It is hard, 
troublesome as you are." 

Nora stood wavering for a moment, hesitating where 
to deposit her excess of joy. Then graciously dropping 
on her knees before Mrs. Keith, she bent her young liead 
and got rid of it in an ample kiss. " I am not afraid of 
you," she said simply. Roger turned round and began 
to poke the fire. 

The next day Nora went forth to buy certain articles 
necessary in travelling. It was raining so heavily that, 
at Roger's direction, she took a carriage. Coming out 
of a shop, in the course of her expedition, she encoun- 
tered Hubert Lawrence tramping along in the wet. He 
helped her back to her carriage, and stood for a moment 
talking to her through the window. As they were going 
in the same direction, she invited him to get in ; and on 
his hesitating, she added that she hoped their interview 



WATCH AND WARD. 99 

was not to end there, as sbe was going to Europe with 
Mrs. Keith. At this news Hubert jumped in and placed 
himself on the front seat. The knowledge that she was 
drifting away gave a sudden value to the present occa- 
sion. Add to this that in the light of Roger's revelation 
after the concert, this passive, predestined figure of hers 
had acquired for the young man a certain picturesque 
interest. Nora found herself strangely at ease with her 
companion. Erom time to time she strove to check her 
happy freedom : but Hubert evidently, with his superior 
urbanity, was not the person to note a little more or less 
in a school-girl's primness. Her enjoyment of his pres- 
ence, her elation in the prospect of departure, made her 
gayety reckless. They went together to half a dozen 
shops and talked and laughed so distractedly over her 
purchases, that she made them sadly at haphazard. At 
last their progress was arrested by a dead-lock of vehicles 
in front of them, caused by the breaking down of a street- 
car. The carriage drew up near the sidewalk in front of 
a confectioner's. On Nora's regretting the delay, and 
saying she was ravenous for lunch, Hubert went into the 
shop, and returned with a bundle of t^rts. The rain 
came down in sheeted torrents, so that they had to close 
both the windows. Circled about with this watery screen, 
they feasted on their tarts with peculiar relish. In a 
short time Hubert made another excursion, and returned 
with a second course. His diving to and fro in the rain 
excited them to extravagant mirth. Nora had bought 
some pocket-handkerchiefs, which were in that cohesive 
state common to these articles in the shop. It seemed a 
very pretty joke to spread the piece across their knees as 
a table-cloth. 



100 WATCH AND WARD, 

" To think of picnicking in the midst of Washington 
Street!" cried Nora, with her lips besprinkled with 
flakes of pastry. 

" For a young lady about to leave her native land, her 
home, and friends, and all that is dear to her," said Hu- 
bert, " you seem to me in very good spirits." 

"Don't speak of it," said Nora. " I shall cry to- 
night ; it is feverish gayety." 

" You will not be able to do this kind of thing abroad," 
said Hubert. " Do you know we are monstrously im- 
proper P For a young girl it 's by no means pure gain, 
going to Europe. She comes into a very pretty heritage 
of prohibitions. You have no idea of the number of im- 
proper things a young girl can do. You are walking on 
the edge of a precipice. Don't look over or you will lose 
your head and never walk straight again. Here, you are 
all blindfold. Promise me not to lose this blessed band- 
age of American innocence. Promise me that, when you 
comeback, we shall spend another morning together as 
free and delightful as this one ! " 

" I promise you 1 " said Nora ; but Hubert's words 
had potently foreshadowed the forfeiture of sweet possi- 
bilities. For the rest of the drive she was in a graver 
mood. They found Roger beneath the portico of the 
hotel, watch in hand, staring up and down the street. 
Preceding events having been explained to him, he of- 
fered to drive his cousin home. 

"I suppose Nora has told you," he began, as they 
proceeded. 

" Yes ! Well, I am sorry. She is a charming girl." 

" Ah ! " Roger cried ; " I knew you thought so I " 



WATCH AND WARD. * .101 



" You are as knowing as ever I She sails, she tells me, 
on Wednesday next. And you, when do you sail P " 

" I dou't sail at all. I ain going home/' 

" Are you sure of that ? " 

Roger gazed for a moment out of the window. " I 
mean for a year," he said, "to allow her perfect 
liberty." 

" And to accept the consequences ? " 

" Absolutely." And Roger folded his arms. 

This conversation took place on a Friday. Nora was 
to sail from New York on the succeeding Wednesday ; 
for which purpose she was to leave Boston with Mrs. 
Keith on the Monday. The two ladies were of course to 
be attended to the ship by Roger. Early Sunday morn- 
ing Nora received a visit from her friend. The reader 
will perhaps remember that Mrs. Keith was a recent 
convert to the Roman Catholic faith ; as such, she per- 
formed her religious duties with peculiar assiduity. Her 
present errand was to propose that Nora should go with 
her to church and join in offering a mass for their safety 
at sea. " I don't want to bring you over, you know ; 
but I think it would be so nice," said Mrs. Keith. Ap- 
pealing to Roger, Nora received permission to do as she 
chose ; she therefore lent herself with fervor to this pious 
enterprise. The two ladies spent an hour at the foot of 
the altar, — an hour of romantic delight to the younger 
one. On Sunday evening Roger, who, as the day of sepa- 
ration approached, became painfully anxious and reluc- 
tant, betook himself to Mrs. Keith, with the desire to en- 
force upon her mind a solemn sense of her responsibilities 
and of the value of the treasure he had confided to her. 



102 WATCH AND WARD. 

Nora, left alone, sat wondering whether Hubert might 
not come to bid her farewell. Wandering listlessly about 
the room, her ^ye fell on the Saturday-evening paper. 
She took it up and glanced down the columns. In one 
of them she perceived a list of the various church services 
of the morrow. Last in the line stood this announce- 
ment : " At the Church, the Rev. Hubert Law- 
rence, at eight o'clock." It gave her a gentle shock ; it 
destroyed the yision of his coming in and their havuig, 
under the lamp, by the fire, the serious counterpart of 
their frolicsome tete-a-tete in the carriage. She longed 
to show him that she was not a giggling cliild, but a wise 
young lady. But no; in a dimly -crowded church, be- 
fore a hundred eyes, he was speaking of divine things. 
How did he look in the pulpit ? If she could only see 
him ! And why not ? She looked at her watch ; it 
lacked ten minutes to eight. She made no pause to re- 
flect; she only felt that she must hurry. She rang the 
bell and ordered a carriage, and then, hastening to her 
room, put on her shawl and bonnet, — the blue crape 
bonnet of the concert. In a few moments she was on 
her way to the church. When she reached it, her heart 
was beating fast ; she was on the point of turning back. 
But the coachman opened the carriage door with such a 
flourisli that she was asliamed not to get out. She was 
late ; the church was full, the service had gone forward, 
the sermon was about to begin. The sexton with great 
solemnity conducted her up the aisle to a pew directly- 
beneath the pulpit. She bent her eyes on the ground, 
but she knew that there was a deep expectant silence, 
and that Hubert was upright before the desk looking at 



WATCH AND WARD. 103 

her. Sbe sat down beside a very grim-visaged old lady 
with bushy eyebrows, who stared at her so hard, that to 
hide her confusion she buried her head and prolonged her 
prayer ; upon which the old lady seemed to stare more 
intently, as if she thought her very pretentious. When 
she raised her head, Hubert had begun to speak ; he was 
looking above her and beyond her, and during the ser- 
mon his level glance never met her own. Of what did 
lie speak and what was the moral of his discourse ? Nora 
could not have told you ; yet not a soul in the audience, 
not all those listening souls together, were more devoutly 
attentive than she. But it was not on what he said, but 
on what he was, or seemed to be, that her perception 
was centred. Hubert Lawrence had an excellent gift of 
oratory. His voice was full of penetrating sweetness, 
and, modulated with infinite art, it sank with a silvery 
cadence. His speech was silver, though I doubt whether 
his silence was ever golden. His utterance seemed to 
Nora the perfection of eloquence. She thought of her 
uplifted feeling in the morning, in the incense-thickened 
air of the Catholic church ; but what a straighter flight 
to heaven was this ! Hubert's week-day face was a sum- 
mer cloud, with a lining of celestial brightness. Now, 
how the divine truth overlapped its relenting edges and 
seemed to transform it into a dazzling focus of light ! 
He spoke for half an hour, but Nora took no note of 
time. As the service drew to a close, he gave her from 
the pulpit a rapid glance, which she interpreted as a re- 
quest to remain. When the congregation began to dis- 
perse, a number of persons, chiefly ladies, waited for him 
near the pulpit, and, as he came down, met him with 



104 WATCH AND WARD. 

greetings and compliments. Nora watched liim from her 
place, listening, smiling, and passing his handkerchief 
over his forehead. At last they released him, and he 
came up to her. She remembered for years afterward 
the strange half-smile on his face. There was something 
in it like a pair of eyes peeping over a wall. It seemed 
to express so fine an acquiescence in what she had done, 
that, for the moment, she had a startled sense of having 
committed herself to something. He gave her his hand, 
without manifesting any surprise. " How did you get 
here ? " 

"In a carriage. I saw it in the paper at the last 
moment." 

" Does Roger know you came ? ** 
" No ; he had gone to Mrs. Keith's." 
" So you started off alone, at a moment's notice ? " 
She nodded, blushing. He was still holding her 
hand; he pressed it and dropped it. "O Hubert," 
cried Nora, suddenly, " noto I know you I " 

Two ladies were lingering near, apparently mother and 
daughter. " I must b6 civil to them," he said ; " they 
have come from New York to hear me." He quickly 
rejoined them and conducted them toward their carriage. 
The younger one was extremely pretty, and looked a lit- 
tle like a Jewess. Nora observed that she wore a great 
diamond in each ear ; she eyed our heroine rather severely 
as they passed. In a few minutes Hubert came back, 
and, before she knew it, she had taken his arm and he 
was beside her in her own carriage. They drove to the 
hotel in silence ; he went up stairs with her. Roger had 
not returned. "Mrs. Keith is very agreeable," said 



WATCH AND WARD. 105 

Hubert. " But Roger knew that long ago. I suppose 
you have heard," he added ; " but perhaps you have not 
heard." 

" I have not heard," said Nora, " but I have sus- 
pected — " 

" Wbat ? " 

" No ; it is for you to say." 

" Why, that Mrs. Keith might have been Mrs. Law- 
rence." 

" Ah, I was right, — I was right," murmured Nora, 
with a little air of triumph. " She may be still. I wish 
she would 1 " Nora was removing her bonnet before the 
mirror over the chimney-piece ; as she spoke, she caught 
Hubert's eye in the glass. He dropped it and took up 
his liat. " Won't you wait ? " she asked. 

He said he thouglit he had better go, but he lingered 
without sitting down. Nora walked about the room, 
she hardly knew why, smoothing the table-covers and re- 
arranging the chairs. 

" Did you cry about your departure, the other night, 
as you promised ? " Hubert asked. 

** I confess that I was so tired with our adventures 
that I went straight to sleep." 

"Keep your tears for a better cause. One of the 
greatest pleasures in life is in store for you. There are a 
hundred things I should like to say to you about Rome. 
How I only wish I were going to show it you I Let me 
beg you to go some day to a little place in the Via Felice, 
on the Pincian, — a house with a terrace adjoining the 
fourth floor. There is a plasterer's shop in the basement. 
You can reach the terrace by the common staircase. I 



106 WATCH AND WARD. 

occupied the rooms adjoining it, and it was my peculiar 
property. I remember I used often to share' it with a 
poor little American sculptress who lived below. She 
made my bust ; the Apollo Belvedere was nothing to it. 
I wonder what has become of her ! Take a look at the 
view, — the view I woke up to every morning, read by, 
studied by, lived by. I used to alternate my periods of 
sight-seeing with fits of passionate study. In another 
winter I think I might have learned something. Your 
real lover of Rome oscillates with a kind of delicious pain 
between the city in itself and the city in literature. They 
keep forever referring you to each other and bandying 
you to and fro. If we had eyes for metaphysical things, 
l^ora, you might see a hundred odd bits of old ambitions 
and day-dreams strewing that little terrace. Ah, as I sat 
there, how the Campagua used to take up the tale and 
respond to my printed page ! If I know anything of the 
lesson of history (a man of my profession is supposed to), 
I learned it in that enchanted air ! I should like to 
know who is sitting in the same school now. Perhaps 
you will write me a word." 

" I will piously gather up the crumbs of ypuf feasts 
and make a meal of them," said Nora. " I will let you 
know how they taste." 

" Pray do. And one more request. Don't let Mrs. 
Keith make a Catholic of you." And he put out his 
hand. 

She shook her head slowly, as she took it. " I will 
have no Pope but you," she said. 

And after that he went. 



!8:^aK^^i;i>*t,ii^^VAa?: ^v^vi:^^ :^;iil-vi^>£;-«ii- 


u^c9l 


'^/fe^-»^'^<-iS^^/^ ^^^^^^^ .^.^^^^ 


»►"• «... 





VI. 




lOGER Lad assured his cousin that he meant to 
return home, and indeed, after Nora*s departure, 
he spent a fortnight in the country. But fmdmg 
be had no patience left for solitude, he again came to 
town and established himself for the winter. A restless 
need of getting rid of time caused him to resume his 
earlier social habits. It began to be said of him that now 
he had disposed of that queer little girl that he had 
picked up Heaven knew where (whom it was certainly 
very good-natured of Mrs. Keith to take off his hands), 
he was going to look about him for a young person whom 
he might take to his home in earnest. Roger felt as if 
he were now establishing himself in society in belialf of 
that larger personality into which his narrow singleness 
was destined to expand. He was paving the way for 
Nora. It seemed to him that she might find it an easy 
way to tread. He compared her attentively with every 
young girl he met ; many were prettier, some possessed 
in larger degree the air of " brightness " ; but none re- 
vealed that deep-shrined natural force, lurking in the 
shadow of modesty like a statue in a recess, which you 
hardly know whether to denominate humility or pride. 



108 WATCH AND WARD. 

One evening, at a large party, Roger found himself 
approached by an elderly lady who had known him from 
his boyhood and for whom he had a traditional regard, 
but with whom of late years he had relaxed his inter- 
course, from a feeling that, being a very worldly old 
woman, her influence on Nora might be pernicious. She 
had never smiled on the episode of which Nora was the 
heroine, and she hailed Roger's reappearance as a sign 
that this episode was at an end and that he had re- 
pented of his abrupt eccentricity. She was somewhat 
cynical in her shrewdness, and, so far as she might, she 
handled matters without gloves. 

** I am giad to see you have fonnd your wits again," 
she said, " and that that forlorn little orphan — Dora, 
Plora, what's her name? — has not altogether made a 
fool of you. You want to marry ; come, don't deny it. 
You can no more remain unmarried than I can remain 
standing here. Go ask that little man for his chair. 
With your means and your disposition and all the rest 
of it, you ought by this time to be setting a good ex- 
ample. But it 's never too late to mend. I have got 
the thing for you. Have you been' introduced to Miss 
'Sands? Who is Miss Sands? There you are to the 
life ! Miss Sands is Miss Sands, the young lady in whose 
honor we are here convened. She is staying with my 
sister. You must have heard of her. New York, but 
good New York ; so pretty that she might be as silly as 
you please, yet as clever and good as if she were as plain 
as I; She is everything a man can want. If you have 
not seen her it 's providential. Come ; don't protest for 
the sake of protesting. I have thought it all out. Al- 



WATCH AND WAED. 109 

low me ! in this matter I am a woman of genius. I know 
at a glance what will do and what won't. You are made 
for each other. Come and be presented. You have just 
time to settle down to it before supper." 

Then came into Roger's honest visage a sort of Mephis- 
tophelian glee, — the momentary intoxication of duplicity. 
" Well, well," he said, "let us see all that *s to be seen." 
And he thought of his Peruvian Teresa. Miss Sands, 
however, proved no Teresa, and Roger's friend had not 
overstated her merits. Her beauty was remarkable ; and 
strangely, in spite of her blooming maturity, something 
in her expression, her smile, reminded him forcibly of 
Nora. So Nora might look after ten or twelve years of 
evening parties. There was a hint, just a hint, of cus- 
tomary triumph in the poise of her head, an air of serene 
success in her carriage ; but it was her especial charm 
that she seemed to melt downward and condescend from 
this altitude of loveliness with a benignant and consider- 
ate grace ; to drop, as it were, from the zeuith of her 
favor, with a little shake of invitation, the silken cable 
of a gradual smile. Roger felt that there was so little 
to be feared from her that he actually enjoyed the mere 
surface-glow of his admiration ; the sense of floa^ng un- 
melted in the genial zone of her presence, like a polar 
ice-block in a summer sea. The more he observed her, 
the more she seemed to foreshadow his prospective Nora; 
so that at last, borrowing confidence from this phantasmal 
identity, he addressed her with unaffected friendliness. 
Miss Sands, who was a woman of perceptions, seeing an 
obviously modest man swimming, as it were, in this mys- 
tical calm, became interested. She divined in Roger's 



110 WATCH AND WARD. 

manner an unnsual species of admiration. She had feasted 
her fill on uttered flattery ; but here was a good man 
whose appreciation left compliments far behind. At the 
end of ten minutes Roger mentioned that she reminded 
him singularly of a young girl he knew. ** A young girl, 
forsooth/' thought Miss Sands. ''Is he coming to his 
fadaisesy like the rest of them P " 

" You are older than she,** Roger added, " but I ex- 
pect her to look like you some time hence.'* 

" I gladly bequeath her my youth, as I come to give 
it up.*' 

" You can never have been plain,** said Roger. " My 
friend, just now, is no beauty. But I assure you, you 



encourage me." 



" Tell me about this young lady,*' his companion re- 
joined. *' It is interesting to hear about people one looks 
like.'* 

"I should like to tell you,** said Roger, "but you 
would laugh at me." 

" You do me injustice. Evidently this is a matter of 

sentiment. Genuine sentiment is the best thing in the 

world; and when I catch myself laughing at a mortal 

^ who confesses to it, I submit to being told that I have 

grown old only to grow silly." 

Roger smiled approval. "I can only say," he an- 
swered, " that this young friend of mine is, to me, the 
most interesting object in the world.'* 

" In other words, you are engaged to marry her." 

" Not a bit of it." 

" Why, then, she is a deaf-mute whom you have ren- 
dered vocal, or a pretty heathen whom you have brought 
to Sunday school." 



WATCH AND WARD. Ill 

Roger laughed exuberantly. " You have hit it/' he 
said; " a deaf-mute whom I have taught to speak. Add 
to that, that she was a little blind, and that now she rec- 
ognizes me with spectacles, and jou will admit that I 
have reason to be proud of my work." Then, after a 
pause he pursued, seriously, " If anything were to hap- 
pen to her — " 

" If she were to lose her faculties — " 

** I should be in despair. But I know what I should 
do. I should come to you." 

" O, I should be a poor substitute ! " 

" I should make love to you," Roger went on. 

" You would be in despair indeed. But you must bring 
me some supper." 

Half an hour later, as the ladies were cloaking them- 
selves, Mrs. Middleton, who had undertaken Roger's 
case, asked Miss Sands for her impressions. These 
seemed to have been highly propitious. " He is not a 
shining light, perhaps," the young lady said, " but he is 
an honest man. He is in earnest ; after what I have 
been through, that is very pleasant. And by the way, 
what is this little deaf and dumb girl in whom he is in- 
terested ? " 

Mrs. Middleton stared. " I never heard she was deaf 
and dumb. Very likely. He adopted her and brought her 
up. He has sent her abroad — to learn the languages ! " 

Miss Sands mused as they descended the stairs. " He 
is a good man," she said. " I like him." 

It was in consequence, doubtless, of this last remark 
that Roger, the next morning, received a note from his 
friend. " You have made a hit ; I shall never forgive 



112 WATCH AND WARD, 

you, if you dou't follow it up. You have only to be de- 
cently civil and then propose. Come and dine with me 
on Wednesday. I shall have only one guest. You know 
I always take a nap after dinner." 

The same post that brought Mrs. Middleton's note 
brought a letter from Nora. It was dated from Rome, 
and ran as follows : — 

** I hardly know, dearest "Roger, whether to begin with 
an apology or a scolding. We have each something to 
forgive, but you have certainly least. I have before me 
your two poor little notes, which I have been reading 
over for the twentieth time ; trying, in this city of mira- 
acles, to work upon them the miracle of the loaves and 
fishes. But the miracle won't come ; they remain only 
two very much bethumbed epistles. Dear Eoger, I 
have been extremely vexed and uneasy. I have fan- 
cied you were ill, or, worse, — that out of sight is out 
of mind. It is not with me, I assure you. I have writ- 
ten you twelve little letters. They have been short only 
because I have been horribly busy. To-day I declined 
an invitation to drive on the Campagna, on purpose to 
write to you. The Campagna, — do you hear P I can 
hardly believe that, five months ago, I was watching the 
ripe apples drop in the orchard at C . We are al- 
ways on our second floor on the Pincian, with plenty of 
sun, which you know is the great necessity here. Close 
at hand are the great steps of the Piazza di Spagna, 
where the beggars and models sit at the receipt of cus- 
tom. Some of them are so handsome, sunning them- 
selves there in their picturesqueness, that I cannot help 
wishing I knew how to paint or draw. I wish I had been 



WATCH AND WARD. 113 

a good girl three years ago and done as you wished, 
and taken drawing-lessons in earnest. Dear Roger, 
I never neglected your advice but to my cost. Mrs. 
Keith is extremely kind, and determined I shall have 
not come abroad to * mope,' as she says. She does not 
care much for sight-seeing, having done it all before ; 
though she keeps pretty well au courant of the various 
church festivals. She very often talks of you, and is very 
fond of you. She is full of good points, but that is her 
best one. My own sight-seeing habits do not at all in- 
commode her, owing to my having made the acquaintance 
of a little old German lady who lives at the top of our 
house. She is a queer wizeued oddity of a woman, but 
she is very clever and friendly, and she has the things of 
Rome on her fingers' ends. The reason of her being here 
is very sad and beautiful. Twelve years ago her younger 
sister, a beautiful girl (she has shown me her miniature), 
was deceived and abandoned by her betrothed. She fled 
away from her home, and after many weary wanderings 
found her way to Rome, and gained admission to the 
convent with the dreadful name, — the Sepolte Vive. 
Here, ever since, she has been immured. The inmates 
are literally buried alive ; they are dead to the outer 
world. My poor little Mademoiselle Stamm followed her 
and took up her dwelling here, to be near her. But they 
have a dead stone wall between them. For twelve years 
she has never seen her. Her only communipation with 
Lisa — - her conventual name she does n't even know — 
is once a week to deposit a bouquet of flowers, with her 
name attached, in the little blind wicket of the convent 
wall. To do this with her own hands, she lives in Rome. 



114 WATCH AND WARD. 

She composes ber bouquet witb a kind of passion ; I bave 
seen her and helped her. Eortunately flowers in Rome 
are very cheap, for my friend is deplorably poor. I have 
bad a little pleasure, or ratlier a great pleasure. For the 
past two months I have furnished the flowers, and I 
assure you we have bad the best. I go eacb time with 
Mademoiselle Stamm to the wicket, and we put in our 
bouquet and see it gobbled up iuto the speechless maw 
of the cloister. It is a dismal amusement, but I confess 
it interests me. I feel as if I knew this poor Lisa; 
though, after all, she may be dead, and we may be wor- 
shipping a shadow. But in this city of shadows and 
memories, what is one shadow the more P Don't think, 
bowever, tliat we spend all our time in playing with 
shadows. We go everywhere, we see everything; I 
could not be in better hands. Mrs. Keith has. doubts 
about my friend's moral influence ; she accuses her of 
being a German philosopher in petticoats. Slie is a Ger- 
man, she wears petticoats; and having known poverty 
and unhappiness, she is obliged to be something of a pbi- 
losopber. As for her metaphysics, they may be very 
wicked, but I should be too stupid to understand them, 
and it is less trouble to abide by my own — and Mrs. 
Keith's ! At all events, I have told her all about you, 
and she says you are the one good man she ever heard 
of ; so it 's not for your to disapprove of her ! My morn- 
ings I spend witli her ; after lunch I go out with Mrs. 
Keith. We drive to the various villas, make visits upon 
all kinds of people, go to studios and churches and pal- 
aces. In the evenings we hold high revel. Mrs. Keitb 
knows every one ; she receives a great many people, and 



,WATCH AND WARD. 115 

we go out in proportion. It is a most amusing world. 
I have seen more people in the last six weeks than I ever 
expected to in a lifetime. I feel so old, — you would n't 
know me ! One grows more in a month in this wonder- 
ful Rome than in a year at home. Mrs. Keith is very 
much liked and admired. She has lightened her mourn- 
ing and looks much better ; but, as she says, she will 
never be herself till she gets back to pink. As for me, 
I wear pink and blue and every color of the rainbow. It 
appears that everything suits me ; there is no spoiling 
me. Of course, 1 am out, — a thousand miles out. I 
came out six weeks ago at the great ball of the Princess 
X. How the Princess X. — poor lady ! — came to serve 
my turn, is more than I can say ; but Mrs. Keith is a 
fairy godmother ; she shod me in glass slippers and we 
went. I fortunately came home with my slippers on my 
feet. I was very much frightened when we went m. I 
courtesied to the Princess : and the Princess stared good- 
naturedly; while I heard Mrs. Keith behind me whis- 
pering, * Lower, lower! * But I have yet to leani how 
to courtesy to condescending princesses. Now I can 
drop a little bow to a good old cardinal as smartly as you 
please. Mrs. Keith has presented me to half a dozen, 
with whom I pass, I suppose, for an interesting convert. 
Alas, I am only a convert to worldly vanities, which I 
confess I vastly enjoy. Dear Roger, I am hopelessly 
frivolous. The shrinking diffidence of childhood I have 
utterly cast away. I speak up at people as bold as brass. 
I like having them introduced to me, and having to be 
interested and interesting at a moment's notice. I like 
listening and watching ; I like sitting up to the small 



116 WATCH AND WARD. 

hours ; I like talking myself. But I need hardly to tell 
you this, at the end of my ten pages of chatter. I have 
talked about my own affairs, because I know they will 
interest you. Profit by my good example, and tell 
me all about yours. Do you miss me P I have read 
over and over your two little notes, to find some little 
hint that you do ; but not a word ! I confess I would n't 
have you too unhappy. I am so glad to hear you are in 

town, and not at that dreary, wintry C . Is our old 

C life at an end, I wonder ? Nothing can ever be 

the same after a winter in Rome. Sometimes I am half 
frightened at having had it in my youth. It leaves such 
a cliance to be dull afterwards ! But I shall come back 
some day with you. And not even the Princess X. shall 
make me forget my winter seat by the library fire at 

C , my summer seat under the great elm." 

This production seemed to Roger a marvel of intel- 
lectual promise and epistolary grace ; it filled his eyes 
with grateful tears ; he carried it in his pocket-book and 
read it to a dozen people. His tears, however, were 
partly those of penitence, as well as of delight. He had 
had a purpose in preserving that silence, which had cost 
so much to his good -nature. He wished to make Nora 
miss him, and to let silence combine with absence to plead 
for him. Had he succeeded P Not too well, it would 
seem ; yet well enough to make him feel that he had 
been cruel. His letter occupied him so intensely that it 
was not till within an hour of Mrs. Middleton's dinner 
that he remembered his engagement. In the drawing- 
room he found Miss Sands, looking even more beautiful 
in a dark high-necked dress than in the glory of gauze 



WATCH AND WARD. 117 

and flowers. Daring dinner he was in excellent spirits ; 
he uttered perhaps no epigrams, but he gave, by his 
laughter, an epigrammatic turn to the ladyish gossip of 
his companions. Mrs. Middleton entertained the best 
hopes. When they had left the table she betook herself 
to her arm-chair, and erected a Httle hand-sci*een before 
her face, behind which she slept or not, as you choose. 
Hoger, suddenly bethinking himself that if Miss Sands 
had been made a party to the old lady's views, his alac- 
rity of manner might compromise him, checked his 
vivacity, and asked his companion stiffly if she played 
the piano. On her confessing to this accomplishment, he 
of course proceeded to open the instrument which stood 
in the adjoining room. Here Miss Sands sat down and 
played with great resolution an exquisite composition of 
Schubert. As she struck the last note he uttered some 
superlative of praise. She was silent for a moment^ and 
then, " That is a thing I rarely play," she said. 
" It is very difficult, I suppose.*' 
" It is not only difficult, but it is too sad." 
*' Sad I " cried Roger, " I should call it very joyous." 
" You must be in very good spirits ! I take it to have 
been meant for pure sadness. This is what should suit 
your mood 1 " and she attacked with great animation one 
of Strauss's waltzes. But she had played but a dozen 
chords when he interrupted her. " Spare me," he said. 
" I may be glad, but not with that gladness. I confess 
that I am in spirits. I have just had a letter from that 
young friend of whom I spoke to you." 

" Your adopted daughter ? Mrs. Middleton told me 
about her." 



118 WATCH AND WARD. 






Mrs. Middleton," said Eoger, in downright fashion^ 

knows notliing about her. Mrs. Middleton," and he 
lowered his voice and laughed, ** is not an oracle of wis- 
dom.'' He glanced into the other room at their hostess 
and her complaisant screen. He felt with peculiar in- 
tensity that, whether she was napping or no, she was 
a sadly superficial, — in fact a positively immoral, — - old 
woman. It seemed absurd to believe that this fair, wise 
creature before him had lent herself to a scheme of such 
a one's making. He looked awhile at her deep clear 
eyes and her gracious lips. It would be a satisfaction 
to smile with her over Mrs. Middleton's machinations. 
" Do you know what she wants to do with us P " he went 
on. " She wants to make a match between us." 

He waited for her smile, but it was heralded by a 
blush, — ablush portentous, formidable, tragical. Like 
a sudden glow of smiset in a noonday sky, it covered 
her fair face and burned on her cloudless brow. " The 
deuce !" thought Roger. "Can it be, — can it be?" 
The smile he had invoked followed fast ; but this was 
not the order of nature. 

** A match between us ! " said Miss Sands. ** What a 
brilliant idea I " 

" Not that I cannot easily imagine falling in love with 
you," Roger rejoined ; " but — but — " 

" But you are in love with some one else." Her 
eyes, for a moment, rested on him intently. "With 
your protegee ! " 

Roger hesitated. It seemed odd to be making this 
sacred confidence to a stranger ; but with this matter of 
Mrs. Middleton's little arrangement between them, she 



WATCH AKD WARD. 119 

was hardly a stranger. If he had offended her, too, the 
part of gallantry was to admit everything. " Yes, I am 
iu love ! " he said. " And with the young lady you so 
much resemble. She does n't know it. Only one or two 
persons know it, save yourself. It is the secret of my 
life, Miss Sands. She is abroad. I have wished to do 
what I could for her. It is an odd sort of position, you 
know. I have brought her up with the view of making 
her my wife, but I have never breathed a word of it to 
her. She must choose for herself. My hope is that she 
will choose me. But Heaven knows what turn she may 
take, what may happen to her over there in Rome. I 
hope for the best ; but I think of little else. Meanwhile 
I go about with a sober face, and eat and sleep and talk, 
like the rest of the world ; but all the while I am count- 
ing the hours. Really, I don't know what has set me 
going in this way. I don't suppose you will at all under- 
stand my situation ; but you are evidently so good that 
I feel as if I might count on your sympathy." 

Miss Sands listened with her eyes bent downward, and 
with great gravity. When he had spoken, she gave him 
her hand with a certain passionate abruptness. " You have 
my sympathy ! " she said. " Much good may it do you ! 
I know nothing of your friend, but it is hard to fancy her 
disappointing you. I perhaps don't altogether enter into 
your situation. It is novel, but it is extremely interest- 
ing. I hope before rejecting you she will think twice. I 
don't bestow my esteem at random, but you have it, Mr. 
Lawrence, absolutely." And with these words she rose. 
At the same moment their hostess suspended her siesta, 
and the conversation became general. It can hardly be 



120 WATCH AND WARD. 

said, however, to liave prospered. Miss Sands talted 
witb a certain gracious zeal which was not nnallied, I 
imagine, to a desire to efface the trace of that superb 
blush I have attempted to chronicle. Roger brooded 
and wondered; and Mrs. Middleton, fancying that 
things were not going well, expressed her displeasure by 
abusing every one who was mentioned. She took heart 
again for the moment when, on the young lady's carriage 
being announced, the latter, turning in farewell to Roger, 
asked him if he ever came to New York. " When you 
are next there," she said, " you must make a point of 
coming to see me. You will have something to tell me." 

After she had gone Roger demanded of Mrs. Middle- 
ton whether she had imparted to Miss Sands her scheme 
for their common felicity. " Never mind what I said or 
did not say," she replied. " She knows enough not to 
be taken unawares. And now tell me — " But Roger 
would tell her nothing. He made his escape, and as he 
walked home in the frosty starlight, his face wore a 
smile of the most sliameless elation. He had gone up in 
the market. Nora might do worse! There stood that 
beautiful woman knocking at his door. 

A few evenings after this Roger called upon Hubert. 
Not immediately, but on what may be called the second 
line of conversation, Hubert asked him what news he had 
from Nora. Roger replied by reading her letter aloud. 
For some moments after he had finished Hubert was 
silent. " * One grows more in a month in this wonderful 
Rome,' " he said at last, quoting, " * than in a year at 
home.' " 

"Grow, grow, grow, and Heaven speed it!" said 
Roger. 



WATCH AND WARD. 121 

** Slie ia growing, you may depend upon it." 

** Of course she is ; and yet," said Roger, discrimi- 
natingly, ** tliere is a kind of girlish fi*eshness, a childish 
simplicity, in her style." 

" Strongly marked," said Hubert, laughing. I " have 
just got a letter from her you would take to be written 
by a child of ten." 

"ro» have a letter P" 

" It came an hour ago. Let me read it." 

" Had you written to her ? " 

" Not a word. But you will see." And Hubert in 
his dressing-gown, standing before the fire, with the 
same silver-sounding accents Nora had adoiired, distilled 
her own gentle prose into Roger's attentive ear. 

" * I have not forgotten your asking me to write to you 
about your beloved Pincian view. Indeed, I have been 
daily reminded of it by having that same view continually 
before my eyes. From my own window I see the same 
dark Rome, the same blue Campagua. I have rigorously 
performed my promise, however, of ascending to your 
little terrace. I have an old German friend here, a per- 
fect archaeologist in petticoats, in whose company I think 
as little of climbing to terraces and towers as of diving 
into catacombs and crypts. We chose the finest day 
of the winter, and made the pilgrimage together. The 
plaster-merchant is still in the basement. We saw him 
in his doorway, standing to dry, whitened over as if he 
meant pei*soually to be cast. We reached your terrace 
in safety. It was flooded with light, — you know the 
Roman light, — the yellow and the purple. A young 
painter who occupies your rooms had set up his easel 



122 WATCH AND WARD. 

under an umbrella in the open air. A yonng coiUadina 
imported, I suppose, from the Piazza di Spagna, was sit- 
tiug to him in the sunshine, which deepened her brown 
face, her blue-back hair, and her white head-cloth. He 
was flattering her to his heart's content, and of course to 
hers. When I want mj portrait painted, I shall know 
where to go. Mj friend explained to him that we had 
come to look at his terrace on behalf of an unhappy far- 
away American gentleman > who had once been lodger 
there. Hereupon he was charmingly polite. He showed 
us the little saloUo, the fragment of bas-relief inserted in 
the wall, — was it there in your day ? — and a dozen of 
his own pictures. One of them was a very pretty ver- 
sion of the view from the terrace. Does it betray an in- 
decent greed for applause to let you know that I bought 
it, and that, if you are very good and write me a delightful 
long letter, you shall have it when I get home ? It seemed 
to me that you would be glad to learn that your little habi- 
tation is not turned to baser uses, and that genius and 
ambition may still be found there. In your case, I sup- 
pose, they were not found in company with dark-eyed 
contadine, though they had au admirer in the person of 
that poor little American sculptress. I asked the young 
painter if she had left any memory behind her. Only a 
memory, it appears. She died a mouth after his arrival. 
I never was so bountifully thanked for anything as for 
buying our young man's picture. As he poured out his 
lovely Italian gratitude, I felt like some patronizing duchess 
of the Henaissance. You will have to do your best, when 
I transfer the picture to your hands,, to give as pretty 
a turn to your thanks. This is only one specimen of a 



WATCH AND WARD. 123 

hundred delightful rambles I have had with Mile. Stamm. 
We go a great deal to the churches ; I never tire of thetn. 
Not in the least that I am turning Papist; though in 
Mrs. Keith's society, if I chose to do so, I might treat 
myself to the luxury of being a nine days' wonder, (ad- 
mire my self-denial !) but because they are so picturesque 
and historic ; so redolent of memories, so rich with tradi- 
tions, so haunted with the past. To go into most of the 
churches is like reading some novel, better than I find most 
novels. They are for different days. On a fine day, if 
I have on my best bonnet, if I have been to a party the 
night before, I like to go to Santa-Maria Maggiore. 
Standing there, I dream, I dream, I dream ; I should 
be ashamed to tell you the nonsense I do dream ! On a 
rainy day, when I tramp out with Mile. Stamm in my 
waterproof; when the evening before, instead of going to 
a party, I have sat quietly at home reading Rio's " Art 
Chretien" (recommended by the Abb6 Leblond, Mrs. 
Keith's confessor), I like to go to the Ara Coeli. There 
you stand among the very bric-a-brac of Christian his- 
tory. Something takes you at the throat, — but you 
will have felt it ; I need n't try to define the indefinable. 
Nevertheless, in spite of M. Eio and the Abbe Leblond 
(he is a very charming old man too, and a keeper of la- 
dies^ consciences, if there ever was one), there is small dan- 
ger of my changing my present faith for one that will make 
it a sin to go and hear you preach. Of course, we don't 
only haunt the churches. I know in a way the Vatican, 
the Capitol, and those charming galleries of the great 
palaces. Of course, you know them far better. I am 
stopped short on every side by my deplorable ignorance ; 



124 WATCH AND WAEt). 

still, as far as may be given to a silly girl, I enjoy. I 
wish you were here, or that I knew some benevolent 
man of culture. My little German duenna is a marvel 
of learning and communicativeness, and when she fairly 
harangues me, I feel as if in my single person I were a 
young ladies* boarding-school. But only a man can talk 
really to the point of this manliest of cities. Mrs. Keith 
sees a great many gentlemen of one sort and another; 
but what do they know of Brutus and Augustus, of Em- 
perors and Popes ? I shall keep my impressions, such as 
they are, and we shall talk them over at our leisure. I 
shall bring home plenty of photographs ; we shall have 
charming evenings looking at them. Roger writes that 
he means next winter to take a furnished house in town. 
You must come often and see us. We are to spend the 

summer in England Do you often see Roger? 

I suppose so, — he wrote he was having a ' capital win- 
ter.' By the way, I am ' out.' I go to balls and wear 
Paris dresses. I toil not, neither do I spin. There is 
apparently no end to my banker's account, and Mrs. 
Keith sets me a prodigious example of buying. Is Roger 
meanwhile going about with patched elbows ? " 

At this point Hubert stopped, and, on Roger's asking 
him if there was nothing more, declared that the rest was 
private. " As you please," said Roger. " By Jove ! 
what a letter, — what a letter ! " 

Several months later, in September, he hired for the 
ensuing winter a small furnished house. Mrs. Keith and 
her companion were expected to reach home on the 10th 
of October. On the 6th, Roger took possession of his 
house. Most of the rooms had been repainted, and on 



WATCH AND WARD. 125 

preparing to establish himself in one for the night, Roger 
found that the fresh paint emitted such an odor as to 
make his position untenable. Exploring the premises, he 
discovered in the lower regions, in a kind of sub-base- 
ment, a small vacant apartment, destined to a servant, in 
which he had a bed put up. It was damp, but, as he 
thought, not too damp, the basement being dry, as base- 
ments go. For three nights he occupied this room. On 
the fourth morning he woke up with a chill and a head- 
ache. By noon he had a fever. The physician, being 
sent for, pronounced him seriously ill, and assured him 
that he had been guilty of a gross imprudence. He might 
as well have slept in a burial-vault. It was the first sani- 
tary indiscretion Roger had ever committed ; he had a 
dismal foreboding of its results. Towards evening the 
fever deepened, and he began to lose his head. He was 
still distinctly conscious that Nora was to arrive on .the 
morrow, and sadly disgusted that she was to fiud him in 
this sorry plight. It was a bitter disappointment that he 
might not meet her at the steamer. Still, Hubert might 
go. ' He sent for Hubert accordingly, who was brought 
to his bedside. " I shall be all right in a day or two," 
he said, " but meanwhile some one must receive Nora. 
I know you will be glad to do it, you villain ! " 

Hubert declared that he was no villain, but that he 
should be happy to perform this service. As he looked 
at his poor fever-stricken cousin, however, he doubted 
strongly if Roger would be " all right " in a day or two. 
On the morrow he went down to the ship. 







vn. 

|N arriving at the landing-place of tLe European 
steamer, Hubert found the passengers filing ashore 
from the tug-boat in whicli they had been trans- 
ferred from the ship. He instructed himself, as he took 
his place near the gangway, to allow for a certain change 
in Nora's appearance ; but even with this allowance none 
of the various advancing ladies seemed to be Nora. Sud- 
denly he found himself confronted with a fair stranger, a 
smile, and an outstretched hand. The smile and the 
offered hand of course proclaimed the young lady's iden- 
tity. Yet in spite of them, Hubert's surprise was great ; 
his allowance had been too small. But the next moment, 
" Now you speak," he said, " I recognize you " ; and the 
next he had greeted Mrs. Keith, who immediately fol- 
lowed her companion ; after which he ushered the two 
ladies, with their servant and their various feminine im- 
pedimenta, into a carriage. Mrs. Keith was to return 
directly to her own house, where, hospitable even amid 
prospective chaos, she invited Hubert to join them at 
dinner. He had, of course, been obliged to inform Nora 
offhand of the cause of Ex)ger's absence, though as yet 
he made light of his illness. It was agreed, however, that 



WATCH AND WARD. 127 

Nora should remain witli Ler compauion until she had 
communicated with her guardian. 

Entering Mrs. Keith's drawuig-room a couple of hours 
later, Hubert found the young girl ou her knees before 
the hearth. He sat down near by, and in the glow of the 
firelight he noted her altered aspect. A year, somehow, 
had made more than a year's difference. Hubert, in his 
intercourse with women, was accustomed to indulge in a 
sort of cool contemplation which, as a habit, found favor 
according to the sensibility of the ladies touching whom 
it was practised. It had been intimated to him more than 
once, that, in spite of his cloth, just a certain turn of the 
head made this a license. But on this occasion his gaze 
was all respectful. He was lost in admiration ; for Nora 
was beautiful. She had left home a simple maiden of 
common gifts, with no greater burden of loveliness than 
the slender, angular, neutral grace of youth and fresh- 
ness ; and hei*e she stood, a mature, consummate, superb 
young woman ! It was as if she had bloomed into ripe- 
ness in the sunshine of a great contentment ; as if, fed by 
the sources of aesthetic delight, her nature had risen 
calmly to its allotted level. A singular harmony and 
serenity seemed to pervade her person. Her beauty lay 
in no inordinate perfection of individual features, but in 
the deep sweet fellowship that reigned between smile and 
step and glance and tone. The total effect was an im- 
pression of the simplest and yet the richest loveliness. 
" Pallas Athene," said Hubert to himself, " sprang full- 
armed, we are told, from the brain of Jove. But we 
have a Western version of the myth. She was bom in 
Missouri ; for years she wore aprons and carried lesson- 



128 WATCH AND WARD. 

books. Then one fine day she was eighteen, and she 
sported a black silk dress of Paris ! " Meanwhile Pallas 
Athene had been asking about Koger. " Shall I see him 
to-morrow, at least ? " she demanded. 

" I think not ; he will not get out for several days." 

" But I can easily go to him. It is very tiresome. 
Things never turn out as we arrange them. I had ar- 
ranged this meeting of ours to perfection ! He was to 
dine with us here, and we were to talk, talk, talk, till 
midnight ; and then I was to go home with him ; and 
there we were to stand leaning on the banisters at his 
room door, and talk, talk, talk till morning." 

" And where was I to be ? " asked Hubert. 

" I had not arranged for you. But I expected to see 
you to-morrow. To-morrow I shall go to Roger." 

" If the doctor allows," said Hubert. 

Nora rose to her feet. " You don't mean to say, Hu- 
bert, that it is as bad as that F " She frowned a little and 
bent her eyes eagerly on his face. Hubert heard Mrs. 
Keith's voice in the hall; in a moment their t6te-a-tete 
would be at an end. Instead of answering her question, 
— " Nora," he said, in his deepest, lowest voice, " you 
are wonderfully beautiful ! " He caught her startled, 
unsatisfied glance; then he turned and greeted Mrs. 
Keith. He had not pleased Nora, evidently; it was 
premature. So to efface the solemnity of his speech, he 
repeated it aloud ; " I tell Nora she is very beautiful ! " 

" Bah I " said Mrs. Keith ; " you need n't tell her ; 
she knows it." 

Nora smiled unconfusedly. " 0, say it all the same I" 

" Was it not the French ambassador, in Rome," Mrs* 



WATCH AND WARD. 129 

Keith demanded, *' who attacked you ia that fashion ? 
He asked to be introduced. There *s an honor ! * Made- 
moiselle, vous etes parfaitemetU belle.* " 

" He was very ugly himself," said Nora. 

Hubert was a lover of the luxuries and splendors of 
life. He had no immediate personal need of them ; he 
could make his terms with narrow circumstances ; but 
his imagination was a bom aristocrat. He liked to be 
reminded that certain things were, — ambassadors, am-, 
bassadorial compliments, Old- World drawing-rooms with 
duskily moulded ceilings. Nora's beauty, to his vision, 
took a deeper color from this homage of an old starched 
and embroidered diplomatist. It was valid, it had passed 
the ordeal. He had little need at table to play at discreet 
inattention. Mrs. Keith, preoccupied with her house- 
keeping and the " dreadful state " in which her freshly 
departed tenants had left her rooms, indulged in a tragic 
monologue and dispensed with responses. Nora, looking 
frankly at Hubert, consoled their hostess with gentle 
optimism ; and Hubert returned her looks, wondering. 
He mused upon the mystery of beauty. Wiiat sudden 
magic had made her so handsome P She was the same 
tender slip of girlhood who had come trembling to hear 
him preach a year before ; the same, yet how different I 
And how sufficient she had grown, withal, to her beauty ! 
How with the added burden had come an added strength, 
— with the greater charm a greater force, — a force subtle, 
sensitive, just faintly self-suspecting. Then came the 
tliought that all 1 his was Roger's, — Roger's speculation, 
Roger's property ! He pitied the. poor fellow, lying 
senseless and helpless instead of sitting there delight- 



130 WATCH AND WARD. 

edly, drawing her out and showing her off. Afier din- 
ner Nora talked little, partly, as he felt, from anxiety 
about her friend, and partly because of that natural re- 
serve of the altered mind when confronted with old asso- 
ciations. He would have been glad to beUeve that she 
was taking pensive note of his own appearance. He had 
made his mark in her mind a twelvemonth before. In- 
numerable scenes and figures had since passed over it ; 
but his figure, Nora now discovered, had not been oblit- 
erated. Fixed there indelibly, it had grown with the 
growth of her imagination. She knew that she had 
changed, and she had wondered whether Hubert would 
have lost favor with difference. Would he suffer by con- 
trast with people she had seen ? Would he seem grace- 
less, colorless, common ? Little by little, as his presence 
defined itself, it became plain to her that the Hubert of 
the past had a lease of the future. As he rose to take his 
leave, she begged him to let her write a line to Koger, 
which he might carry. 

" He will not be able to read it," said Hubert. 

Nora mused. "I will write it, nevertheless. You 
will place it by his bedside, and the moment he is better 
he will find it at hand." 

When she had left the room, Mrs. Keith demanded 
tribute. " Have not I done well ? Have not I made a 
charming girl of her ? " 

" She does you great credit," said Hubert, with a men- 
tal reservation. 

" O, but wait awhile ! You have not seen her yet. 
She is tired, and anxious about your cousin. Wait till 
she comes out. My dear Mr. Lawrence, she is perfect. 



WATCH AND WARD. 131 

She lacks nothing, she has nothing too much. Yon must 
do me justice. I saw it all in the rough, and I knew 
just what it wanted. I wish she were my daughter : you 
should see great doings ! And she 's as good as gold. 
It 's her nature. After all, unless your nature is right, 
what are you ? " But before Hubert could reply to this 
little philosophic proposition, Nora reappeared with her 
note. 

The next morning Mrs. Keith went to call ofl&cially 
upon her mother-in-law ; and Nora, left alone and think- 
ing much of Ex)ger's condition, conceived an intense desire 
to see him. He had never been so dear to her as now, 
and no one's right to be with him was equal to hers. She 
dressed hastily and repaired to the little dwelling they 
were to have so happily occupied. She was admitted by 
her old friend Lucinda, who, between trouble and wonder, 
found a tliousand things to say. Nora's beauty had never 
received warmer tribute thau the affectionate marvellings 
of this old woman who had known her early plainness so 
well. She led her into the drawing-room, opened the 
windows and turned her about in the light, patted her 
braided tresses, and rejoiced with motherly unction in her 
tallness and straightness and elegance. Of Roger she 
spoke with tearful eyes. " It would be for him to see 
you, my dear," she said ; " he would not be disappointed. 
You are better than his brightest dreams. 0, 1 know all 
about it ! He used to talk to me evenings, after you 
were in bed. * Lucinda, do you think she *a pretty P Lu- 
ciuda, do you think she 's plain ? Lucinda, do you dress 
her warm P Lucinda, have you changed her shoes ? And 
mind, Lucinda, take good care of her hair ; it 's the only 



132 WATCH AND WARD. 

tiling we are sure of I' Yes, my dear, you have me to 
thauk for these big braids. Would he feel sure of you 
now, poor man ? You must keep yourself in cotton-wool 
till he recovers. You are like a picture ; you ought to be 
enclosed in a gilt frame and stand against the wall.*' Lu- 
cinda begged, however, that Nora would not insist upon 
seeing him ; and her great reluctance betraying his evil 
case, Nora consented to wait. Her own small experience 
could avail nothing. " He is flighty," said Lucinda, " and 
I 'm afraid he would n't recognize you. If he should n't, 
it would do you no good ; and if he should, it would do 
him none ; it would increase his fever. He 's bad, my 
dear, he 's bad ; but leave him to me ! I nursed him as 
a baby ; I nursed him as a boy ; I will nurse him as a 
man grown. I have seen him worse than this, with the 
scarlet fever at college, when his poor mother was dying 
at home. Baby, boy, and man, he has always had the 
patience of a saint. I will keep him for you, Miss Nora, 
now I have seen you ! I should n't dare to meet him in 
heaven, if I were to let him miss you ! " 

When Lucinda had returned to her bedside duties, 
Nora wandered about the house with a soundless tread, 
taking melancholy note of the preparations Roger had 
made for her return. His choice, his taste, his ingenuity, 
were everywhere visible. The best beloved of her pos- 
sessions from the old house in the country had been trans- 
ferred hither and placed in such kindly half-lights as 
would temper justice with mercy ; others had found ex- 
pensive substitutes. Nora went into the drawing-room, 
where the blinds were closed and the chairs and sofas 
shrouded in brown linen, and sat sadly revolving possibil- 



WATCH AND WABD. 133 

ities. How, with Roger's death, loneliness again would 
close about her ; how he was her world, her strength, her 
fate I He had made her life ; she needed hitn still to 
watch his work. She seemed to apprehend, as by a sudden 
supernatural light, the extent of his affection and his 
wisdom. In the perfect stillness of the house she could 
almost hear his tread on the stairs, hear his voice utter 
her name with that tender adjustment of tone which con- 
veyed a benediction in a commonplace. Her heart rose 
to her throat; she felt a passionate desire to scream. She 
buried her head in a cushion to stifle the sound ; her silent 
tears fell upon the silk. Suddenly she heard a step in the 
hall ; she had only time to brush them away before Hu- 
bert Lawrence came in. He greeted her with surprise. 
" I came to bring your note/* he said ; " I did not expect 
to find you.' " 

** Where better should I be ? " she asked, with inten- 
sity. " I can do nothing here, but I should look ill else- 
where. Give me back my note, please. It does not say 
half I feel." He gave it back, and stood watching her 
wliile she tore it in bits and threw it into the empty fire- 
place. ''I have been wandering over the house," she 
added. " Everything tells me of poor Roger." She felt 
an indefinable need of protesting of her affection for him. 
" I never knew till now," she said, " how mucli I loved 
him. I am sure you don't know him, Hubert ; not as I 
do. I don't believe any one does. People always speak 
of him with a little air of amusement. Even Mrs. Keith 
is witty at his expense. But I know him ; I grew to 
know him in tliiukiug of him while I was away. There 
is more of him than the world knows or than the world 



134 WATCH AND WAKD. 

would ever know, if it were left to his modesty and the 
world's stupidjty ! " Hubert hpgan. to smile at her elo- 
quence. '' But I mean to put an end to his modesty. I 
mean to say, 'Come, Roger, hold up your head and 
speak out your mind and do yourself justice.' I have 
seen people without a quarter of his goodness who had 
twenty times his assurance and his success. I shall turn 
the tables 1 People shall have no favor from me, unless 
they are good to Roger. If they want me, they must 
take him too. They tell me I am a beauty, and I can do 
what I please. We shall see. The first thing I shall do 
will be to make them show him a great deal of respect." 
" I admire your spirit," said Hubert. " Dr. Johnson 
liked a good hatter ; I like a good lover. On the whole, 
it's more rarely found. But aren't you the least bit 
Quixotic, with your terrible loyalty? No one denies 
that Roger is the best of the best of the best 1 But do 
what you please, Nora, you cannot make virtue entertain- 
ing. As a clergyman, you know, I have had to try it. 
But it 's no use ; there 's a fatal family likeness between 
goodness and dulness. Of course you are fond of Roger. 
So am I, so is every one in his heart of hearts. But 
what are we to do about it ? The kindest thing is to 
leave him alone. His virtues are his own affair. You 
describe him perfectly when you say that everything in 
the house here sings his praise, — already, before he has 
been here ten days 1 The chairs are all straight, the pic- 
tures are admirably hung, the locks are oiled, the winter 
fuel is stocked, the bills are paid ! Look at the tidies 
pinned on the chairs. I will warrant you he pinned them 
with his own hands. Such is Roger ! Such virtues^ in 



WATCH AND WARD. 135 

a houseliold, are priceless. He ougbt never to marry ; 
bis wife would die for want of occupation. What society 
cares for in a man is not his household virtues, but his 
worldly ones. I am talking now, of course, as a man of 
tlie world. Society wants to see things by the lai^ end 
of the telescope, not by the small. * Be as good as you 
please,' it says, ' but unless you are interesting, I '11 uoue 
of you 1 " 

"Interesting!" cried Nora, with a rosy flush. "I 
have seen some very interesting people who have bored 
me to death. But if people don't care for Roger, it 's 
their own loss ! " Pausing a moment she fixed Hubert 
with the searching candor of her gaze. " You are un- 
just," she said. 

This charge was pleasant to the young man's soul; 
he would not, for the world, have summarily rebutted 
it. "Explain, dear cousin," he said, smiling kindly. 
" Wherein am I unjust ? " 

It was the first time he had called her cousin; the 
word made a sweet confusion in her thoughts. But 
looking at him still while she collected them, " You don't 
care to know ! " she cried. " Not when you smile so I 
You are laughing at me, at Roger, at every one ! " 
Clever men had ere this been called dreadfullv satirical 
by pretty women; but never, surely, with just that 
imperious naivete. She spoke with a kind of joy in her 
frankness; the sense of intimacy with the young man 
had effaced the sense of difference. 

"The scoffing fiend! That's a pretty character to 
give a clergyman ! " said Hubert. 

" Are you, at heart, a clergyman P I have been won- 
dermg." 



136 WATCH AND WAED. 



" You have heard me preach." 

" Yes, a year ago, when I was a silly little girl. I 
want to hear you again." 

" No, I have gained my crown, I propose to keep it. 
I would rather not be found out. Besides, I am not 
preacliing now; I am resting. Some people think me a 
clergyman, Nora," he said, lowering his voice with a liint 
of mock humility. " But do you know you are formi- 
dable, with your fierce friendships and your jealous sus- 
picions ? If you doubt of me, well and good. Let me 
walk like an Homeric god in a cloud ; without my cloud, 
I should be sadly ungodlike. Indeed, for that matter, I 
doubt of myself. But I don't really undervalue Eoger. 
I love him, I admire him, I envy him. I would give the 
world to be able to exchange my restless imagination for 
his silent, sturdy usefulness. I feel as if I were toiling 
in the sun, and he were sitting under greeu trees resting 
from an effort which he has never needed to make. Well, 
virtue, I suppose, is welcome to the shade. It 's cool, but 
it 's dreadfully obscure ! People are free to find out the 
best and the worst of me ! Here I stand, with all my 
imperfections on my head ; tricked out with a surplice, 
baptized with a reverend^ (Heaven save the mark !) 
equipped with platform and pulpit and text and audience, 
— erected into a mouthpiece of the spiritual aspirations 
of mankind. Well, I confess our sins ; that 's good hum- 
ble-minded work. And I must say, in justice, that when 
once I don my surplice (I insist on the surplice, I can do 
nothing without it) and mount into the pupit, I feel con- 
scious of a certain power. They call it eloquence ; I sup- 
pose it is. I don't know what it 's worth, but they seem 
to like it." 



WATCH AND WARD. 137 

Nora sat speechless, with expanded eyes, hardly know- 
ing whether his humility or his audacity became him best; 
flattered, above all, by what she deemed the recklessness 
of his confidence. She had removed her hat, which she 
held in her hand, gently curling its great black feather. 
Few things in a woman could be prettier than her un- 
covered forehead, illumined with her gentle wonder. 
The moment, for Hubert, was critical. He knew that a 
young girl's heart stood trembling on the verge of his 
influeuce ; he felt, without fatuity, that a glance might 
beckon her forward, a word might fix her there. Should 
he speak his word ? Tliis mystic circle was haunted with 
the rustling gliosts of women who had ventured within 
and found no rest. But as the innermost meaning of 
Nora's beauty grew vivid before him, it seemed to him 
that she, at least, miglrt cleanse it of its sinister memo- 
ries and fill it with the sense of peace. He knew that 
to such as Nora he was no dispenser of peace ; but as 
he looked at her she seemed to him as an angel knocking 
at his gates. He could not turn her away. Let her 
come, at her risk ! For angels there is a special provi- 
dence. "Don't think me worse than I am,"Jie said, 
"but don't thiuk me better! I shall love Roger well 
until I begin to fancy that you love him too well. Then, 
— it 's absurd, perhaps, but I feel it will be so, — I shall 
be jealous." 

The words were lightly uttered, but his eyes and voice 
gave them meaning. Nora colored and rose; she went 
to the mirror and put on her hat. Then turning round 
with a laugh which, to one^ in the secret, might have 
seemed to sound the coming-of-age of her maiden's fancy. 



138 WATCH AND WARD. 

" If you mean to be jealons/' she said, " now is your 
time 1 I love Roger now witli ail my heart. I cannot 
do more ! ** She remained but a moment longer. 

Roger's illness baffled the doctors, though the doctors 
were clever. For a fortnight it went from bad to worse. 
Nora remained constantly at home, and played but a pas- 
sive part to the little social drama enacted in Mrs. Keith's 
drawing-room. This lady had already cleared her stage 
and rung up her curtain. To the temporary indisposition 
of her young performer she resigned herself with that 
serene good grace which she had always at coDimand,and 
which was so subtle an intermixture of kindness and 
shrewdness that it would have taken a wiser head than 
Nora's to discriminate them. She valued the young girl 
for her social uses; but she spared her at this trying 
hour, just as an impresario, with an eye to the whole 
season, spares a prima donna who is threatened with 
bronchitis. Between these two, though there was little 
natural sympathy, there was a wondrous exchange of 
caresses and civilities. They had quietly judged each 
other and each sat serenely encamped in her estimate 
as in a strategical position. Nevertheless I would have 
trusted neither lady's account of the other. Nora, for 
perfect fairness, had too much to learn, and Mrs. Keith 
too much to unlearn. With her companion, however, she 
had unlearned much of that circumspect jealousy with 
which, in the interest of her remnant of youth and 
beauty, she taxed her commerce with most of the fash- 
ionable sisterhood. She strove to repair her one nota- 
ble grievance against fate by treating Nora as a daughter. 
She mused with real maternal ardor upon the young 



/ 



WATCH AND WARD. 139 

girl's matrimonial possibilities, and among them upon 
that design of which Roger had dropped her a hint of 
old. He held to his purpose of course ; if he Lad fan- 
cied Nora then, he could but fancy her now. 

But were his purpose and his fancy to be viewed with 
undiminished complacency ? What might have been a 
great prospect for Nora as a plain homeless child, was a 
small prospect for a young lady who was turning out one 
of the beauties of the day. Roger would be the best of 
husbands ; but in Mrs. Keith's philosophy a very good 
husband might represent a very indifferent marriage. She 
herself had married a fool, but she had married well. 
Her easy, opulent widowhood was there to show it. To 
call things by their names, would Nora, in marrying 
Roger, marry money ? Mrs. Keith desired to appraise 
the worldly goods of her rejected suitor. At the time of 
his suit she had the matter at her fingers* ends ; but she 
suspected that smce then he had been lining his pockets. 
He puzzled her ; he had a way of seeming neither rich 
nor poor. When he spent largely, he had the air of a 
man straining a point; yet when he abstained, it seemed 
rather from taste than from necessity. She had been 
surprised more than once, while abroad, by his copious 
remittances to Nora. The point was worth making sure 
of. The reader will agree with tne that her conclusion 
warranted her friend either a fool or a hero; for she gra- 
ciously assumed that if, financially, Roger should be found 
wanting, she could easily prevail upon him to make way 
for a millionnaire. She had several millionnaires in her 
eye. Never was better evidence that Roger passed 
for a good fellow. In any event, however, Mrs. Keith 



140 WATCH AlfD WARD. 

had no faror to spare for Hubert and bis marked and in- 
creasing " attentions." She had determined to beware 
of false alarms ; but meanwhile she was vigilant. Hop 
bert presented himself daily with a report of his cousin's 
condition, — a report most minute and exhaustive, seem- 
ingly, as a couple of hours were needed to make it. 
Nora, moreover, went frequently to her friend's house, 
wandered about aimlessly, and talked with Luciuda ; and 
here Hubert, coming on the same errand, was sure to be 
found or to find her. Roger's malady had defined itself 
as virulent typhus fever ; strength and reason were at the 
lowest ebb. Of course on these occasions Hubert walked 
home with the young girl; and as the autumn weather 
made walking delightful, they chose the longest way. 
They might have been seen at this period perambulating 
in deep discourse certain outlying regions, the connec- 
tion of which with the main line of travel between Mrs« 
Keith's abode and Roger's was not immediately obvi- 
ous Apart from her prudent fears, Mrs. Keith had a 
scantier kindness for Hubert than for most brilliant 
men. " What is he, when you come to the point ? " she 
impatiently demanded of a friend to whom she had im- 
parted her fears. '* He is neither fish nor flesh, neither 
a priest nor a layman. I like a clei^man to bring with 
him a little odor of sanctity, — something that rests you, 
after all your bother. Nothing is so pleasant, near the 
fire, at tlie sober end of one's drawing-room. If he 
does n't fill a certain place, he is in the way. The Rev- 
erend Hubert is in any place and every place. His man- 
ners are neither of this world nor, I hope, of the next. 
Last night he let me bring him a cup of tea and sat 



WATCH AND WARTt 141 

lounging in his cbair while I put it into his hand. 0, he 
knows what he 's about. He is pretentious, with all his 
nonchalance. He finds the prayer-book rather meagre 
fare for week-days ; so he consoles himself with his pretty 
parishioners. To be a parishioner, you need n't go to his 
church." 
But in spite of Mrs. Keith's sceptical criticism, these 

' young persons played their game iu their own way, with 
wider moves, even, and heavier stakes, than their shrewd 
hostess suspected. As Nora, for the present, declined 
all invitations, Mrs. Keith in the evening frequently went 
out alone, leaving her in the drawing-room to entertain 
Hubert Lawrence. Roger's illness furnished a gmve 
undercurrent to their talk and gave it a tone of hazardous 
jnelancholy. Nora's young life had known no such hours 
as these. She hardly knew, {Serhaps, just what made them 
what they were. She hardly wished to know ; she shrank 

* from breaking the charm with a question. The scenes of 
the past year had gathered into the background like a 
huge distant landscape, glowing with color and swarming 
with life ; she seemed to stand with her friend in the 
shadow of a passing cloud, looking off into the mighty 
picture, caressing its fiue outlines, and lingeiing where the 
haze of regret lay purple in its hollows. Hubert, mean- 
while, told over the legends of town and tower, of hill 
and stream. Never, she fondly fancied, had a young 
couple conversed with less of narrow exclusiveness ; they 
took all history, all culture, into their confidence ; the 
radiant liglit of an immense horizon seemed to shine be- 
tween them. Nora had felt perfectly satisfied; she 
seemed to live equally in every need of her being, in soul 



142 WATCH XSJ> WAKB. 

and sense, in heart and mind. As for Hubert, he knew 
nothing, for the time, save that the angel was within his 
gates and must be treated to angelic fare. He had for 
the time the conscience, or the no-conscience, of a man 
who is feasting in Eljsian meadows. He thought no 
evil ; he designed no harm ; the hard face of destiny was 
twisted into a smile. If only, for Hubert's sake, this 
had been an irresponsible world, without penalties to pay, 
without turnings to the longest lanes ! If the peaches 
and plums in the garden of pleasure had no cheeks but 
ripe ones, and if, when we have eaten the fruit, we had 
not to dispose of the stones ! Nora's charm of charms 
was a certain maidenly reserve which Hubert both 
longed and feared to abolish. While it soothed his con- 
science it irritated his ambition. He wished to know in 
what depth of water he stodd ; but there was no telltale 
ripple in this tropic calm. Was he drifting in mid- 
ocean, or was he cruising idly among the sandy shallows ? 
As the days elapsed, he found liis rest troubled by this 
folded rose-leaf of doubt ; for he was not used to being 
baffled by femiuine riddles. He determined to pluck out 
the heart of the mystery. 

One evening, at Mrs. Keith's urgent request, Nora had 
prepared to go to the opera, as the season was to be very 
brief. Mrs. Keith was to diue with some friends and go 
tliither in tlieir company ; one of the ladies was to call 
for Nora after dinuer, and they were to join the party at 
the theatre. In the afternoon there came to Mrs. Keith's 
a young German lady, a pianist of merit who had her way 
to make, a niece of Nora's regular professor, with whom 
Nora had an engagement to practise duets twice a week. 



WATCH AND WARD. 143 

It so happened that, owing to a violent rain. Miss Lilien- 
thal had been nnable to depart after their playing; 
whereupon Nora had kept her to dinner, and the two, 
over their sweetbread, had sworn an eternal friendship. 
After dinner Nora went up to dress for the opera, and, 
on descending, found Hubert sitting by the fire deep in 
German discourse with the musical stranger. "I was 
afraid you would be going," said Hubert ; " I saw Der 
Freyschutz on the placards. Well, lots of pleasure ! Let 
me stay here awhile and polish up my German with 
Mademoiselle. It is great fun. And when the rain is 
over, Fraiilein, perhaps you '11 not mind my walking 
home with you." 

But Mademoiselle was gazing in mute envy at Nora, 
standing before her in festal array. " She can take the 
carriage," said Nora, "when we have used it." And 
then reading the burden of that wistful regard — " Have 
you never heard Der Freyschutz F'^ 

" Often ! " said the other, with a poignant smile. 

Nora reflected a moment, then drew off her gloves. 
" You shall go, you shall take my pkce. I will stay at 
home. Your dress will do ; you shall wear my shawl. 
Let me put this flower into your hair, and here are my 
gloves and my fan. So ! You are charming. My gloves 
are lai^, — never mind. The others will be delighted 
to have you ; come to-morrow and tell me all about it." 
Nora's friend, in her carriage, was already at the door. 
The gentle Fraiilein, half shrinking, half eager, suffered 
herself to be hurried down to the carriage. On the 
doorstep she turned and kissed her hostess with a fervent 
" Lu alkrliebste ! " Hubert wondered whether Nora's 



144 WATCH AND WARD. 

purpose Lad been to please Ler friend or to please her- 
self. Was it that she preferred his society to Weber's 
music ? He knew that she had a passion for Weber. 
"You have lost the opera," he said, when she reap- 
peared ; "but let us have an opera of our own. Plaj 
something; play Weber." So she played Weber for 
more than an hour ; and I doubt whether, among the 
singers who filled the theatre with their melody, the mas- 
ter found that evening a truer interpreter than the young 
girl playing in the lamplit parlor to the man she loved. 
She played herself tired. " You ought to be extremely 
grateful,'' she said, as she struck the last chord; " I have 
never played so well." 

Later they came to speak of a novel which lay on tlie 
table, and wliich Nora had been reading. "It is very 
silly," she said, " but I go on with it in spite of myself. 
I am afraid I am too easily pleased ; no novel is so silly 
I can't read it. I recommend you this, by the way. The 
hero is a young clergyman, endowed with every charm, 
M'ho falls in love with a Roman Catholic. She is rather 
a bigot, and though she loves the young man, she loves 
her religion better. To win his suit he comes near going 
over to Rome ; but he pulls up short and determines the 
mountain shall come to Mahomet. He set^ bravely to 
work, converts the young lady, baptizes her one week 
and marries her the next." 

" Heaven preserve us, what a hotch-potch ! " cried 
Hubert. " Is that what they are writing nowadays P I 
very seldom read a novel, but when I glance into one, 
I am sure to find some such stuff as that! Nothing 
irritates me so as the flatness of people's imagination. 



WATCH AND WARD. 145 

Common life, — I don't say it 's a vision of bliss, but it 's 
better than that. Their stories are like the underside of 
a carpet, — nothing but the stringy grain of the tissue, — 
a muddle of figures without shape and flowers without 
color. When I read a novel my imagination starts off 
at a gallop and leaves the narrator hidden in a cloud of 
dust; I have to come jogging twenty miles back to the 
denouement. Your clergyman here with his Ex)mish 
sweetheart must be a very poor creature. Why did n't 
he marry her first and convert her afterwards ? Is n't a 
clergyman after all, before all, a man F I mean to write 
a novel about a priest, who falls in love with a pretty 
Mahometan and swears by Allah to win her.'* 

** Hubert ! " cried Nora, " would you like a clergy- 
man to love a pretty Mahometan better than the truth ? " 

" The truth P A pretty Mahometan may be the truth. 
If you can get it in the concrete, after shivering all your 
days in the cold abstract, it 's worth a bit of a compro- 
mise. Nora, Nora!" he went on, stretching himself 
back on the sofa and flinging one arm over his head, " I 
stand up for passion ! If a thing can take the shape of 
passion, that 's a fact in its favor. The greater passion 
is the better cause. ' If my love wrestles with my faith, 
as the angel with Jacob, and if my love stands upper- 
most, I will admit it 's a fair game. Faith is faith, under 
a hundred forms 1 Upon my word, I should like to 
prove it. What a fraction of my personality is this cleri- 
cal title I How little it expresses ; how little it covers ! 
On Sundays, in the pulpit, I stand up and talk to five 
hundred people. Does each of them, think you, appro- 
priate his &VG hundredth share of my discourse P I can 



146 WATCH AND WARD. 

imagine talking to one person and saying five liundred 
times as much, even though she were a pretty Mahome- 
tan or a prepossessing idolatress I I can imagine being 
five thousand miles away from this blessed Boston, — in 
Turkish trousers, if you please, with a turban on my head 
and a chibouque in my mouth, with a great blue ball of 
Eastern sky staring in through the round window, high 
up; all in perfect indifference to the fact that Boston 
was abusing, or, worse still, forgetting me ! But, my dear 
Nora," Hubert added, suddenly, " don't let me introduce 
confusion into your ideas." And he left his sofa and came 
and leaned against the mantel-shelf. " This is between 
ourselves ; I talk to you as I would to no one else. Uu- 
derstand me and forgive me I There are times when I must 
speak out and pay my respects to the possible, the ideal ! 
I must protest against the vulgar assumption of people 
who don't see beyond their noses ; that people who do, 
you and I for instance, are living up to the top of our 
capacity; that we are contented, satisfied, balanced. I 
promise you I am not satisfied, not I ! I have room for 
more. I only half live ; I am like a purse filled at one 
end with small coin and empty at the other. Perhaps 
the other will never know the golden rattle I The Lord's 
will be done ; I can say that with the best of them. But 
I shall never pretend that I have known happiness, that 
I have known life. On the contrary, I shall maintain I 
am a failure. I had the wit to see, but I lacked the 
courage to do, — and yet I have been called reckless, 
irreverent, audacious. My dear Nora, I am the veriest 
coward on earth; pity me, if you don't despise me. 
There are men born to imagine things, others bom to 



WATCH AND WARD. 147 

do tbem. Evidently I am not one of the doers. But I 
imagine things, I assure you ! " 

Nora listened to this flow of sweet unreason without 
staying her hand in the work, which, as she perceived 
the drift of his talk, she had rapidly caught up, but with 
a beating heart and a sense of rising tears. It was a 
ravishing mixture of passion and reason, the agony of 
a restless soul. Of old, she had thought of Hubert's 
nature as immutably placid and fixed; it gave her the 
notion of lucid depth and soundless volume. But of 
late, with greater nearness, she had seen the ripples on 
its surface and heard it beating its banks. This was not 
the first time ; but the waves had never yet broken so 
high ; she had never felt their salt spray on her cheeks. 
The touch of it now was delicious. She went on with 
her work, mechanically taking her stitches. She felt 
Hubert's intense blue eyes; the little blue flower in 
her tapestry grew under her quick needle. A door had 
suddenly been opened between their hearts ; she passed 
through it. ** What is it you imagine," she asked, with 
intense curiosity; "what is it you dream of doing?" 

" I dream," he said, " of breaking some law for your 
sake ! " 

The answer frightened her ; passion was outstripping 
reason. What had she to do with broken laws ? She 
trembled and rolled up her work. " I dream," she said, 
trying to smile, "of the beauty of keeping laws. I 
expect to get a deal of pleasure from it yet." And she 
left her chair. Eor an instant Hubert was confused. 
Was this the last struggle which precedes submission, or 
the mere prudence of indifference P Nora's eyes were on 



148 WATCH AND WARD. 

the clock. It rang out eleven. " To begin "with," sTie 
said, " let me keep the law of going early to bed. Good 
night I " 

Hubert wondered ; he hardly knew whether this was 
^ rebuke or a challenge. "You will at least shake 
bands," he said reproachfully. 

She bad meant in self-defence to omit this ceremony, 
but she let him take her hand. Hubert gazed at her 
a moment and raised it to his lips. She blushed, and 
rapidly withdrew it. " There ! " cried Hubert, " I have 
broken a law ! " 

"Much good may it do you!" she answered, and 
went her way. He stood for a moment, waiting, and 
fancying, rather fatuously, that she might come back. 
Then, as he took up his hat, he wondered whether she 
too was not a bit of a coquette. ' » 

Nora wondered on her own side whether this scene 
had not been a little pre-arranged. Por a day love and 
doubt fared in company. Lucinda's mournful discourse 
on the morrow was not of a nature to restore her calm- 
ness. " Last night," said Roger's nurse, " he was very bad. 
He woke up out of his stupor, but he was none the better 
for that. He talked all night about you. If he murmurs 
a word, it 's always your name. He asked a dozen 
times if you had arrived, and foi^ot as often as I told 
him, — he, dear man, who used to remember the very 
hairs of your head. He kept wondering whether any- 
thing had happened to you. Late in the evening, when 
the carriages began to pass, he cried out that each of them 
was you, and what would you think of him for not com- 
ing to meet you P * Don't tell her how bad I am,' he says ; 



WATCH AND WARD. 149 

* I must have been in bed two or tbree days, have n't I, 
Lucinda P Say I shall be out to-morrow ; that I have 
only a little cold. Hubert will do everything for her/ he 
kept saying. And then when, at midnight, the wind be- 
gan to blow, he declared it was a storm, that your ship 
was on the coast. God keep you safe, he cried. Then 
he asked if you were changed and grown; were you 
pretty, were you tall, should he know you P * And he took 
the hand-glass and looked at himself and wondered if you 
would know him. He cried out that he was ugly, he 
was horrible, you would hate him. He bade me bring 
him his dressing things so that he might make himself look 
better, and when I would n't, he began to rage and call me 
names, and then lie broke down and cried like a child." 
Hearing these things, Nora prayed intently for Roger's 
recovery, — frayed that he might live to see her more 
cunningly and lovingly his debtor. She wished to do 
Bomethiug, she hardly knew what, not only to prove, but 
forever to commemorate, her devotion. She felt capable 
of erecting a monument of self-sacrifice. Her conscience 
was perfectly at rest. 

For a couple of days she saw nothing of Hubert. On 
tbe third there came excellent news of Roger, who had 
taken a marked turn for the better, and had passed the 
crisis. She had declined, for the evening, a certain 
attractive invitation ; but on the receipt of these tidings 
she revoked her refusal. Coming down to the drawing- 
room with Mrs. Keith, dressed and shawled, she found 
Hubert in waiting, with a face which uttered bad news. 
Roger'§ improvement had been momentary, a relapse had 
followed, and he was worse than ever. She tossed off 



150 WATCH AND WARD. 

ber sbawl with an energy not unnoted by ber duenna. 
" Of course I cannot go," sbe said. " It is neitber pos- 
sible nor proper." Mrs. Keitb would bave given ber big- 
gest bracelet tbat tbis tbing sbould not Iiave bappened in 
just this way ; but sbe submitted witb a good grace, — 
for a duenna. Hubert went down witb ber to ber car- 
riage. At tbe foot of tbe stairs sbe stopped, and while 
gathering up ber skirts, " Mr. Lawrence," sbe demanded, 
" are you going to remain here ? " 

" A little while," said Hubert, witb bis imperturbable 
smile. 

" A very little while, I hope." Sbe bad been won- 
dering whether admonition would serve as a check or a 
stimulus. " I need hardly tell you tbat tbe young lady 
up stairs is not a person to be trifled witb." 

" I hardly know what you mean," said Hubert. " Am 
I a person to trifle P " 

" Is it serious, then P" 

Hubert hesitated a moment Sbe perceived a sudden 
watchful quiver in bis eye, like a sword turned edge out- 
ward. She unsheathed one of ber own steely beams, and 
for tbe tenth of a second there was a dainty crossing of 
blades. " I admire Miss Lambert," cried Hubert, " witb 
all irfy heart." 

" True admiration," said Mrs. -Keith, " is one half re- 
spect and the other half self-denial." 

Hubert laughed, ever so politely. "I will put tbat 
into a sermon," he said. 

" O, I have a sermon to preach you," sbe answered. 
" Take your hat and go." 

He looked very grave : " 1 will go up and get my bat." 



WATCH AND WARD. 151 

Mrs. Keith, catcliing his eye as he closed the carriage 
door, wished to Heaven that she had held her tongue. " I 
have done him injustice," she murmured as she went. 
" I have fancied him light, but I see he 's vicious." Hu- 
bert, however, kept his promise in so far as that he did 
take up his hat. Having held it a moment he put it down. 
He had reckoned without his hostess ! Nora was seated by 
the fire, with her bare arms folded, with a downcast brow. 
Dressed in pale corn-color, her white throat confined by 
a band of blue velvet overstitched with a dozen pearls, 
she was not a subject for summary farewells. Meeting 
her eyes, he saw they were filled with tears. ** You must 
not take this thing too hard," he said. 

!For a moment she answered nothing ; then she bent 
her face into her hands and her tears flowed. " poor, 
poor Roger ! " she cried. 

Hubert watched her weeping in her ball-dress those 
primitive tears. " I have not given him up," he said at 
last. ** But suppose I had — " She raised her head and 
looked at him. *' O," he cried, " I should have a hundred 
things to say ! Both as a clergyman and as a man, I 
should preach resignation. In this crisis, let me speak 
my mind. Roger is part of your childhood ; your child- 
hood 's at an end. Possibly, with it he too is to go ! At 
all events you are not to feel that in losing him you lose 
everything. I protest ! As you sit here he belongs to 
•your past. Ask yourself what part he may pla/in your 
future. Believe mg, you will have to settle it, you will 
have to choose* Here, in any case, your life begins. 
Your tears are for ifft dead past ; this is the future, with 
its living needs. Roger's fate is only one of them." 



152 WATCH AND WAKD. 

She rose with her tears replaced by a passionate grayity. 
** Ah, you dout know what you say ! " she cried. " Talk 
of my future if you like, but not of my past ! No one 
can speak of it, no one knows it ! Such as you see me 
here, bedecked and bedizened, I am a penniless, home* 
less, friendless creature 1 But for Boger, I might be in 
the streets ! Do you think I have forgotten it, that I ever 
can forget it ? There are things that color one's life, mem- 
ories that last forever. I have my share ! What am I 
to settle, between whom am I to choose ? My love for 
Roger is no choice, it is part and parcel of my being ! " 

Hubert was inspired ; he forgot everything but that she 
was lovely. " I wish to Heaven,*' he cried, " that you 
had never ceased to be penniless and friendless ! I wish 
Roger had left you alone and not smothered you beneath 
this terrible burden of gratitude ! Give him back his 
gifts ! Take all / have 1 In the streets ? In the streets 
I should have found you, as lovely in you poverty as you 
are now in your finery, and a thousand times more free 1 " 
He seized her hand and met her eyes with irresistible 
ardor. Pain and pleasure, at once, possessed Nora's heart. 
It was as if joy, bursting in, had trampled certain tender 
flowers that bloomed on the threshold. But Hubert had 
cried, " I love you ! I love you ! " and joy had taken 
up the words. She was unable to speak audibly ; but in 
an instant she was spared the effort. The servant hastily 
came in with a note superscribed with her name. Slie 
motioned to Hubert to open it. He read it aloud. " Mr. 
Lawrence is sinking. You had better^rae. I send my 
carriage." Nora's voice came to her with a cry, — " He 
is dying, he is dying I " 



WATCH AND WARD. 153 

In a minute's time sbe found herself wrapped in ber 
shawl and seated with Hubert in the doctor's ooupe. A 
few moments more and the doctor received them at the 
door of Roger's room. They passed in, and Nora went 
straight to the bed. Hubert stood an instant and saw her 
drop on her knees beside the pillow. She flung back her 
shawl with vehemence, as if to release her arms ; slie 
was throwing them round her friend. Hubert went on 
into the adjoining chamber, of which the door stood 
open. The room was dark, the otlier lit by a night-lamp. 
He stood listening awhile, but heard nothing; then he 
began to walk slowly to and fro, past the doorway. He 
could see nothing but the shining train of Nora's dress 
lying on the carpet beyond the angle of the bed. He 
wanted terribly to see more, but he feared to see too 
much. At moments he thought he heard whispers. This 
lasted some time ; then the doctor came in, with what 
seemed to him an odd, unprofessional smile. "The 
young lady knows a few remedies not taught in the 
schools," he whispered. " He- has recognized her. He- , 
is good for to-night, at^least. Half an hour ago he had ** 
no pulse at all, but this has started it. I will come back 
in an hour." After he had gone Lucinda came, self-com- 
missioned, and shut the door in Hubert's face. He stood 
a moment, with an unreasoned sense of insult and defeat. 
Then he walked straight out of the house. But the next 
morning, after breakfast, a more generous sentiment 
moved him to return. The doctor was just coming away. 
" It was a Daniel come to judgment," the doctor de- 
clared. **I verily believe she saved him. He will be 
sitting up in a fortnight." Hubert learned that, having 



154 WATCH AND WARD. 

achieved ber miracle, Nora bad returned to Mrs. Keith's. 
What arts she had used he was left to imagiue. He bad 
still a sore feeling of haying just missed a crowning joy ; 
but there might yet be time to grasp it. He felt, too, an 
urgent need of catching a glimpse of the afterglow of 
Nora's mystical effluence. He repaired to Mrs. Keith's, 
hoping to find the young girl alone. But the elder lady, 
as luck would have it, was established in the drawing- 
room, and she made haste to inform him that Nora, fa- 
tigued by ber " watching," had not yet left her room. But 
if Hubert was sombre, Mrs. Keith was radiant. Now was 
her chance to preach her promised sermon ; she had just 
come into possession of facts that furnished a capital text. 

" I suppose you will call me a meddling busybody," 
she said. " I confess I seem to myself a model of for- 
bearance. Be so good as to tell me in three words 
whether you are in love with Nora." 

Taken thus abruptly to task, Hubert, after a moment's 
trepidation, kept his balance. He measured the situation 
at a glance, and pronounced it bad. But if heroic urban- 
ity would save it, he would be urbane, ** It is hardly a 
question to answer in two words," he answered, with an 
ingenuous smile. " 1 wish you could tell me I " 

" Really," said Mrs. Keith, " it seems to me that by 
this time you might know. Tell me at least whether you 
are prepared to marry her ? " 

Hubert hesitated just an instant. " Of course not, — 
so long as I am not sure I am in love with her ! " 

" And pray when will you make up your mind ? And 
what is to become of poor Nora meanwhile P " 

" Why, Mrs. Keith, if Nora can wait, surely you can." 
The urbanity need not be all on his side. 



WATCH AND WARD. 155 

" Nora can wait ? That 's easily said. Is a young 
girl a thing to be tried like a piano, — to be strummed 
on for a pretty tune ? Mr. Lawrence, if I had ever 
doubted of the selfisliness of men ! What this matter has 
been for you, you know best yourself; but I may tell 
you that for Nora it has been serious." At these words 
Hubert passed his hand nervously through his hair and 
walked to the window. " The miserable fop ! " said Mrs. 
Keith, privately. " His vanity is the only thing that has 
ears. It is very true they are long ones ! If you are 
not able to make Nora a handsome offer of marriage/' slie 
proceeded, "you have no business here. Retire, quietly, 
expeditiously, humbly. Leave Nora to me. I will heal 
her bruises. They shall have been wholesome ones." 

Hubert felt that these peremptory accents implied a 
menace, and that the lady spoke by book. His vanity 
rankled, but discretion drew a long breath. For a fort- 
night it had been shut upi in a closet. He thanked his 
stars they had no witnesses ; from Mrs. Keith, for once, 
he could afford to take a lesson. He remained silent for 
a moment, with his brow bent in meditation. Then turn- 
ing suddenly, he faced the music. "Mrs. Keith," he 
said, "you have done me a service. I thank you sin- 
cerely. I have gone further than I meant ; I admit it. 
I am selfish, I am vain, I am anything you please. My 
only excuse is Nora's loveliness. It had made an ass of 
me ; I had forgotten that this is a life of logic." And he 
bravely took up his hat. 

Mrs. Keith was prepared for a " scene " ; she was an- 
noyed at missing it, and her easy triumph led her on. 
8be thought, too, of the young girl up stairs, combing 



156 WATCH AND WARD. 

oat her golden liair, and seeing no logic in her looking- 
glass. She had dra||^d a heavy gun to the front ; she 
determined to fire her shot. So much virtue had never 
inspired her with so little respect. She played a moment 
with the bow on her morning-dress. "Let me thank 
you for your great humility," she said. " Do you know 
I was going to be afraid of you, so that I had in- 
trenched myself behind a great big preposterous fact? 
I met, last evening, Mrs. Chatterton of New York. You 
know she 's a great talker, but she talks to the point. 
She mentioned your engagement to a certain young 
lady, a dark-eyed person, — need I repeat the name ? " 
There was no need of her repeating names; Hubert 
stood before her, flushing crimson, with his blue eyes 
flashing cold wrath. He remained silent a moment, 
shaking a scornful finger at her. " Por shame, madam," 
he cried. " That 's in shocking taste ! You might have 
been generous ; it seems to me I deserve it." And with 
a summary bow he departed. 

Mrs. Keith repented of this extra touch of zeal ; the 
more so as she found that, practically, Nora was to be 
the victim of the young man's displeasure. For four 
days he gave no sign ; Nora was left to explain his ab- 
sence as she might. Even Roger's amendment failed to 
console her. At last, as the two ladies were silting at 
lunch, his card was brought in, superscribed P. P. C. 
Nora read it in silence, and for a moment rested her 
eyes on her companion with a piteous look which seemed 
to ask, " Is it yo« I have to thank for this ? " A torrent 
of remonstrances rose to Nora's lips, but they were 
sealed by the reflection that^ though her friei^ might 



WATCH AND WAED. 157 

have been conceraed ia Hubert's desertion, its peculiar 
abruptness had a peculiar motive. She pretended to oc- 
cupy herself with her plate; but her self-control was 
rapidly ebbing. She silently rose and retreated to her 
own room, leaving Mrs. Keith moralizing, over her mut- 
ton-chop, upon the miseries of youiig-ludyhood and the 
immeasurable egotism of the man who would rather pro- 
duce a cruel effect than none at all. For a week after 
this Nora was seriously ill. On the day she left her room 
she received a short note from Hubert. 

• New York. 

Dear Noba: You have, I suppose, been expecting to 
hear from me ; bat I have not written, becaose I am unable to 
write as I wish and unwilling to write as — other people would 
wish t I left Boston suddenly, but not unadvisedly. I shall 
for the present be occupied here. The last month I spent 
there will remain one of the best memories of my life. But it 
was time it should end I Bemember me a little — what do I 
say ? — forget me ! Farewell. I received this morning from 
the doctor the best accounts of Roger. 

Nora handled this letter somewhat as one may imagine 
a pious maiden of the antique world to have treated a 
messenger from the Delphic oracle. It was obscure, it 
was even sinister ; but deep in its sacred dimness there 
seemed to glow a fiery particle of truth. Slie locked it up 
in her dressing-case and wondered and waited. Shortly 
after came a missive of a different, cast. It was from her 
cousin, George Fenton, and also dated New York. 

Deab Nora, — You have left me to find out your return 
in the papers. I saw your name a month ago in the steamer's 
list. But I hope the fine people and things you have been see- 



158 WATCH AND WARD. 

ing have n't driven me quite out of your heart, — that you re- 
member at least who I am. ,1 received your answer to my let- 
ter of last February ; after which I immediately wrote again, 
but in vainl Perhaps you never got my letter; I could 
scarcely decipher your Italian address. Excuse my want of 
learning ! Your photograph is a joy forever. Are you really 
as handsome as that ? It taxes even the credulity of one who 
knows how pretty you used to be; how good you must be still. 
When I last wrote I told you of my having taken stock in an 
enterprise for working over refuse iron. But what do you 
care for refuse iron ? It *8 awfully dirty, and not fit to be 
talked of to a fine lady like you. Still, if you have any odd 
bits, — old keys, old nails, — the smallest contributions thank- 
fully received 1 We think there is money in it ; if there is n't, 
I 'm afloat again. If this fails, I think of going to Texas. I 
wish I might see you first. Get Mr. Lawrence to bring you 
to New York for a week. I suppose it would n't do for me to 
call on you in the light of day ; but I might hang round your 
hotel and see you going in and out. Does he love me as much 
as ever, Mr. Lawrence ? Poor man, tell him to take it easy ; 
I shall never trouble him again. Are you ever lonely in the 
midst of your grandeur V Do you ever feel that, after all, these 
people are not of your blood and bone ? I should like you to 
qaarrel with them, to know a day's friendlessness or a day's free- 
dom, so that you might remember that here in New York, in a 
dusty iron-yard, there is a poor devil who is your natural pro- 
tector. 




vni. 




lOGER'S convalescence went smoothly forward. 
One morning as he lay coquetting deliciously 
with returning sense, he became aware that a 
woman was sitting at his window in the sun. She seemed 
to be reading. He fancied vaguely that she was Lucinda; 
but at last it occurred to him that Lucinda was not 
addicted to literature, and that Lucinda's tresses, catch- 
ing the light, were not of a kind to take on the likeness 
of a queenly crown. She was no vision ; his visions had 
been dark and troubled ; and this image was radiant 
and fixed. He half closed his eyes and watched her 
lazily through the lids. There came to him, out of his 
boyish past, a vague, delightful echo of the " Arabian 
Nights." The room was gilded by the autumn sunshine 
into the semblance of an enamelled harem court; he him- 
self seemed a languid Persian, lounging on musky cush- 
ions ; the fair woman at the window a Scheherazade, a 
Badoura. He closed his eyes completely and gave a lit- 
tle groan, to see if she would move. When he opened 
them, she had moved ; she stood near his bed, looking 
at him. For a moment his puzzled gaze still told him 
nothing but that she was fictitiously fair. She smiled 



160 WATCH AND WAED. 

and smiled, and, after a little, as he only stared con- 
fusedly, she blushed, not like Badoura or Scheherazade, 
but like Nora. Her frequent presence after this became 
the great fact in his convalescence. The thought of her 
beauty filled the long empty hours during which he was 
forbidden to do anything but grow strong. Sometimes 
he wondered whetlier his impression of it was only part of 
the universal optimism of a man with a raging appetite. 
Then he would question Lucinda, who would shake her 
head and chuckle with elderly archness.* '' Wait till yoa 
are on your feet, sir, and judge for yourself," she would 
say. ''Go and call on her at Mrs. Keith's, and then 
tell me what you think." He grew well with a beating 
heart ; he would hare stayed his recovery for the very 
dread of facing his happiness. But at last, one Sunday, 
he discarded his dressing-gown and sat up, clothed and 
in liis right mind. The effort, of course, gave him a huge 
appetite, and he dealt vigorous justice upon his luncheon. 
He had just finished, and his little table was still in posi- 
tion near his arm-cliair, when Nora made her appearance. 
She had been to church, and on leaving church had taken 
a long walk. She wore one of those dark rich toilets of 
early winter that are so becoming to fair beauties ; but 
her face lacked freshness ; she was pale and tired. On 
Roger's remarking it, she said the service had given her 
a headache ; as a remedy, she had marclied off briskly 
at haphazard, missed her way, and wandered hither and 
thither. But here she was, safe and sound and hungry. 
She asked for a share of Roger's luncheon, and, tak- 
ing off her bonnet, was bountifully served at his table. 
She ate largely and hungrily, jesting at her appetite and 



WATCH AND WARD. 161 

getting back her color. Roger leaned back in bis chair, 
watching her, carving her partridge, oflPering her this and 
that ; in a word, falling in love. It happened as natu- 
rally as if he had never allowed for it. The flower of her 
beauty had bloomed in a night, that of his passion in a 
day. When at last she laid down her fork, and, sinkmg 
back in her chair, folded her hands on her arms and sat 
facing him with a friendly, pointless, satisfied smile, and 
then, raising her goblet, threw back her head and showed 
her white throat and glanced at him over the brim, while 
he noted her plump ringless hand, with the little finger 
curled out, he felt that he was in health again. She 
strolled about the room, idly touching the instruments on 
his dressing-table and the odds and ends on his chimney- 
piece. Her dress, which she had released from the loops 
and festoons then in fashion, trailed rustling on the car- 
pet, and lent her a sumptuous, ladyish air which seemed 
to give a pnce to this domiciliary visit. " Everywhere, 
everywhere, a little dust," she said. " I see it is more 
than time I should be back here. I have been waiting 
for you to invite me; but as you don't seem inclined, I 
invite myself." 

Roger said nothing for a moment. Then with a blush, 
" I don't mean to invite you ; I don't want you." 

Nora stared. "Don't want me? Far exemple !" 

" I want you as a visitor, but not as a — " And he 
fumbled for his word. 

" As a resident ? " She took it gayly. " You turn 
me out of doors ? " 

** No ; I don't take you in — yet awhile. My dear 
child, I have a reason." 



162 WATCH AND WAED. 

Nora wondered, still smiling. " I might consider this 
very unkind," she said, " if I had not the patience of an 
angel. Would you kindly mention your reason ? " 

" Not now," he answered. " But never fear, when it 
comes it will be all-sufficient ! " But he imparted it, a 
couple of days after, to Mrs. Keith, who came late in the 
afternoon to present her compliments on his recovery. 
, She displayed an almost sisterly graciousness, enhanced 
by a lingering spice of coquetry ; but somehow, as she 
talked, he felt as if she were an old woman and he still 
a young man. It seemed a sort of hearsay that they 
should ever have been mistress and lover. " Nora will 
have told you," he said, " of my wishing you kindly to 
keep her awhile longer. I can give you no better proof 
of my regard, for the fact is, my dear friend, I am in love 
with her." 

" Come ! " she cried. " This is interesting." 

" I wish her to accept me freely, as she would accept 
any other man. Eor that purpose I must cease to be, in 
all personal matters, her guardian." 

" She must herself forget her wardship, if there is to 
be any sentimentalizing between you, — all but forget it, 
at least. Let me speak frankly," she went on. Where- 
upon Roger frowned a bit, for he had known her frank- 
ness to be somewhat incisive. " It is all very well that 
you should be in love with her. You are not the first-. 
Don't be frightened ; your chance is fair. The needful 
point is that she should be just the least bit in love with 
you." 

He shook his head with melancholy modesty. " I don't 
expect that. She loves me a little, I hope ; but I say 



WATCH AND WARD. 163 

nofliing to her imagination. Circumstances are fatally 
against it. If she falls in love, it will be with a man as 
unlike me as possible. Nevertheless, I do hope she may, 
w^ithout pain, learn to think of me as a husband. I hope," 
lie cried, with appealing eyes, " that she may see a cer- 
tain rough propriety in it. After all, who can make her 
such a husband as I ? I am neither handsome, nor clever, 
nor accomplished, nor celebrated. She might choose from 
a dozen men who are. Pretty lovers doubtless they would 
make ; but, my friend, it 's the husband, the husband, that 
is the test ! " And he beat his clenched hand on his 
knee. '' Do they know her, have they watched her, as I 
have done ? What are their months to my years, their 
vows to my acts P Mrs. Keith ! " — and he grasped her 
hand as if to call her to witness, t- '* I undertake to make 
her happy. I know what you can say, — that a woman's 
liappiness is worth nothing unless imagination lends a 
hand. Well, even as a lover, perhaps I am not a hope- 
less case ! And then, I confess, other things being equal, 
I would rather Nora should not marry a poor man." 

Mrs. Keith spoke, on this hint. " You are a rich one, 
then ? " 

Ex)ger folded up his pocket-handkerchief and patted it 
out on his knee, with pregnant hesitation. " Yes, I am 
rich, — I may call it so. I am rich ! " he repeated with 
unction. " I can say it at last." He paused a moment, 
and then, with unstudied irony, — "I was not alto- 
gether a pauper when you refused me. Since then, for 
the last six years, I have been saving and sparing and 
counting. My purpose has sharpened my wits, and for- 
tune, too, has favored me. I have speculated a little, I 



164 WATCH AND WAKD. 

hare handled stock and turned this and that about, and 
now I can offer my wife a very pretty fortune. It has 
been going on very quietly ; people don't know it ; but 
Nora, if she cares to, shall show them ! *' Mrs. Keith 
colored and mused ; she was lost in a tardy afterthought. 
" It seems odd to be talking to you this way," Ex)ger 
went on, exhilarated by this summing-up of his career. 
" Do you remember that letter of mine from P P " 

" I did not tear it up in a rage,*' she answered. " I 
came across it the other day." 

" It was rather odd, my writing it, you know," Koger 
confessed. " But in my sudden desire to register a vow, 
I needed a friend. I turned to you as my best friend." 
Mrs. Keith acknowledged the honor with a toss of her 
head. Had she made a mistake of old ? She very soon 
decided that Nora should not repeat it. Her hand-shake, 
as she left her friend, was generous ; it seemed to assure 
him that he might count upon her. 

Wlien, soon after, he made his appearance in her draw- 
ing-room, she gave him many a hint as to how to play his 
cards. But he irritated her by his slowness ; he was too 
circumspect by half. It was only in the evening that he 
took a hand in the game. During the day he left Nora 
to her own affairs, and was in genei*al neither more nor 
less attentive than if he had been a merely susceptible 
stranger. To spectators his present relation with the 
young girl was somewhat puzzling ; though Mrs. Keith, 
by no ambiguous giving out, as Hamlet says, iiad diffused 
a sympathetic expectancy. Roger wondered again and 
again whether Nora had guessed his meaning. He ob- 
served in her at times, as he fancied, a sort of nervous 



WATCH AND WARD. 165 

levity which seemed bom of a need to conjure away the 
phantom of sentiment. And of this hostile need, of course, 
he hereupon strove to trace the lineage. He talked with 
her little, as yet, and never interfered in lier talk with 
others; but he watched her devotedly from comers, and 
caught her words through the hum of voices. Sometimes 
she looked at him as if she were on the point of telling 
him something. What had she to tell him ? In trying 
to guess, Roger made up bis mind that she was in love. 
Search as he could, however, he was unable to find her 
lover. It was no one there present ; they were all alike 
wasting their shot ; the enemy had stolen a march aud 
was hidden in the very heart of the citadel. He appealed 
distractedly tx> Mrs. Keith. "Lovesick, — lovesick is the 
word," he groaned. " I have read of it all my days in 
the poets, but here it is in the flesh. The poor girl plays 
her part well; she's wound up tight; but the spring 

will snap and the watch run down. D n the man ! 

I would rather he carried her off than sit and see this." 
He saw that his friend had bad news. " Tell me every- 
thing," he said ; " don't spare me." 

" You have noticed it at last," she answered. " I was 
afraid you would. Well ! he 's not far to seek. Think 
it over; can't you guess? My dear Mr. Lawrence, you 
are celestially simple. Your cousin Hubert is not." 

" Hubert ! " Roger echoed, staring. A spasm passed 
over his face ; his eyes flashed. At last he hung his head. 
" Dear, dear," he said ; " have I done it all for Hubert ? " 
Not if I can help it ! " cried Mrs. Keith, sharply. 

She may not marry you ; but, at the worst, she shall 
not marry him ! " 



€€ 



166 WATCH AND WARD. 

Koger laid his hand on her arm ; first heavily, then 
gently. " Dear friend, she must be happy, at any cost. 
If she loves Hubert, she must marry him. I will settle 
an income ! " 

Mrs. Keith gave his knuckles a great rap with her fan. 
" You will settle a fiddlestick 1 You will keep your 
money and you will marry Miss Nora. Leave it to me ! 
If you have no regard for your rights, at least I have." 

" Rights ? what rights have I ? I might have let her 
alone. I need n't have settled down on her in this deadly 
fashion. But Hubert 's a huppy man ! Does he know 
it P You must write to him. I can't ! " 

Mrs. Keith burst into a ringing laugh. " Know it ? 
You are amazing ! Had n't I better telegi-aph ? " . 

Roger stared and frowned. "Does he suspect it, 
then ? " 

Mrs. Keith rolled up her eyes. " Come," she said, 
" we must begin at the beginning. When you speak of 
your cousin, you open up a gulf. There is not much in 
it, it 's true ; but it 's a gulf. Your cousin is a humbug, 
— neither more nor less. Allow me; I know what I 
say. He knew, of course, of your plans for Nora ? " 
Roger nodded. " Of course he did ! He took his 
chance, therefore, while you were well out of the way. 
He lost no time, and if Nora is in love with him, he can 
tell you why. He knew that he could not marry her, 
that he should not, that he would not. But he made love 
to her, to pass the time. Happily, it passed soon. I had 
of course to be cautious ; but as soon as I saw how things 
were going, I spoke, and spoke to the point. Though 
he 's a humbug, he is not a fool ; that was all he needed. 



WATCH AND WARD. 167 

He made his excuses, such as thej were ! I shall know 
in future what to think of him." 

Roger shook his head mournfully. " I am afraid it 's 
not to be so easily settled. As you say, Hubert 's a gulf. 
I never sounded it. The fact remains that they love each 
other. It *s hard, but it 's fatal.'* 

Mrs. Keith lost patience. " Don't try the heroic ; you 
will break down," she cried. " You are the best of men, 
but after all you are human. To begin with, Hubert 
does n't love her. He loves no one but himself. Nora 
must find her happiness where women as good have 
found it before this, in a sound, sensible marriage. She 
cannot marry Hubert; he is engaged to another person. 
Yes, I have the facts ; a young girl in New York with 
whom he has been off and on for a couple of years, but 
who holds him to his bargain. I wish her joy of it ! 
He is not to be pitied ; she is not Nora, but she is 
extremely fond of him, and she is to have money. So 
good-by to Hubert. As for you, cut the knot ! She 's 
a bit sentimental just now; but one sentiment, at that 
age, is as good as another. And, my dear man, the girl 
has a conscience, it *s to be hoped; give her a chance 
to show it. A word to the wise ! " 

Thus exhorted, Roger determined to act. The next 
day was a Sunday. While the ladies were at church he 
took up his position in their drawing-room. Nora came 
in alone ; Mrs. Keith had made a pretext for ascending 
to her own room, where she waited with some solemnity. 
"I am glad to find you," Nora said. "I have been 
wanting particularly to speak to you. Is my probation 
not over? May not I now come back ? " 



168 • WATCH AND WARD. 

"It 's about that," he answered, "that I came to talk 
to you. The probation has been mine. Has it lasted 
long enough ? Do you Iotc me yet P Come back to me, — 
come back to me as my wife." 

She looked at him, as he spoke, with a clear, unfright- 
ened gaze, and, with his last words, broke frankly into a 
laugli. But as his own face was intensely grave, a grad- 
ual blush arrested her laugh. " Your wife, Roger p " she 
asked gently. 

" My wife. I offer you my hand. Dear Nora, is it so 
incredible P " 

To his uttermost meaning, somehow, her ear was still 
closed ; she still took it as a jest. " Is that the only con- 
dition on which we can live together P " she asked. 

" The only one, — for me ! " 

She looked at him, still sounding his eyes with her 
own. But his passion, merciful still, retreated before her 
frank doubt. " Ah," she said, smiling, " what a pity I 
have grown up ! " 

"Well," he said, "since you are grown we must make 
the best of it. Think of it, Nora, think of it. I am 
not so old, you know. I was young when we began. 
You know me so well; you would be safe. It would 
simplify matters vastly; it's at least worth thinking of," 
he went on, pleading for very tenderness, in this pitiful 
minor key. " I know it must seem odd ; but I make 
you the offer ! " 

Nora was almost shocked. In this strange new char- 
acter of a lover she seemed to see him eclipsed as a friend, 
now when, in the trouble of her love, she turned long- 
ingly to friendship. She was silent awhile, vrith her em- 
barrassment. " Dear Roger," she answered, at last, "let 



WATCH AND WAED. 169 

me love you in the old, old way. Why need we change? 
Nothing is so good, so safe as that. I thank you from 
my heart for your offer. You have given me too much 
already. Marry any woman you please, and I will be her 
serviug-maid." 

He had no heart to meet her eyes; heJiad wrought his 
own fate. Mechanically, he took up his hat and turned 
away, without speaking. She looked at him an instant, 
uncertain, and then, loath to part with him so abruptly, 
she laid her arm round his neck. " You don't think me 
unkind?" she said. "I will do anything for you on 
earth " — But that was unspoken, yet Roger heard it. 
The dream of years was shattered ; he felt sick ; he was 
dumb. " You forgive me ? " she went on. " O Rx)ger, 
Roger!" and, with a strange inconsequence of loving- 
uess, she dropped her head on his shoulder. He held her 
for a moment as close as he had held his hope, and then 
released her as suddenly as he had parted with it. Before 
she knew it, he was gone. 

Nora drew a long breath. It had all come and gone 
so fast that she was bewildered. It had been what she 
had heard called a " chance." Suppose she had grasped 
at it ? She felt a kind of relief in the thought that she 
had been wise. That she had been cruel, she never sus- 
pected. She watched Roger, from the window, cross the 
street and take his way up the sunny slope. Two ladies 
passed him, friends, as Nora saw ; but he made no bow. 
Suddenly Nora's reflections deepened and the scene be- 
came portentous. If she had been wrong, she had been 
horribly wrong. She hardly dared to think of it. She 
ascended to her own room, to take counsel of familiar 
privacy. In the hall, as she passed, she found Mrs. Keith 



170 WATCH AND WARD. 

at her open door. Tbis lady put her arm round her waist, 
led her into the chamber toward the light. " Something 
has happened/' she said, looking at her curiously. 

" Yes, I have had an offer of marriage. From Roger." 

" Well, well ? " Mrs. Keith was puzzled by her face. 

'* Is n't it kind of him ? To think he should have 
thought it necessary ! It was soon settled." 

" Settled, dearest ? How ? " 

" Why — why — *' And Nora began to smile the 
more resolutely, as her imagination had taken aUrm. 
"I declined." 

Mrs. Keith released her with a gesture almost tragi- 
cal. " Declined P Unhappy girl ! " The words were 
charged with a nghteous indignation so unusual to the 
speaker that Nora's conscience took the hint. 

She turned very pale. "What have I doneP" she 
asked, appealingly. 

" Done, my dear ? You have done a blind, cruel act ! 
Look here." And Mrs. Keith having hastily ransacked 
a drawer, turned about with an open letter. " Read that 
and repent." 

Nora took the letter ; it was old and crumpled, the 
ink faded. She glanced at the date, — that of her first 
school year. In a moment she had read to the closing 
sentence. " It will be my own fault if I have not a per- 
fect wife." In a moment more its heavy meaning over- 
whelmed her ; its vital spark flashed back over the inter- 
val of years. She seemed to see Roger's bent, stunned 
head in the street. Mrs. Keith was frightened at her 
work. Nora dropped the letter and stood staring, open- 
mouthed, pale as death, with her poor young face blank 
with horror. 




jORA frequently wondered in after years how that 
Sunday afternoon had worked itself away ; how, 
throuj^h the tumult of amazement and grief, de- 
cision, illumination, action, had finally come. She had 
disembarrassed herself of a vague attempt of Mrs. Keith's 
towards some compensatory caress, and making her way 
half blindly to her own room, had sat down face to face 
with her trouble. Here, if ever, was thunder from a 
clear sky. Her friend's disclosure took time to *well to 
its full magnitude; for an hour she sat, half stunned, 
seeming to see it climb heaven-high and glare upon her 
like some monstrous blighting sun. Then at last she 
broke into a cry and wept. Her immense pain gushed 
and filtered through her heart, and passed out in shud- 
deriiig sobs. The whole face of things was hideously 
altered ; a sudden horror had spning up iu her innocent 
past, and it seemed to fling forward a shadow which 
made the future a blank darkness. She felt cruelly de- 
luded and injured ; the sense of sufl'ered wrong absorbed 
for the time the thought of wrong inflicted. She was too 
weak for indignation, but she overflowed with delicate 
resentment. That Roger, whom all these years she had 



/ 



172 WATCH AND WAKD. 

fancied as simple as charity, should have been as double 
as interest, should have played a part and laid a train, 
that she had been living in darkness, on illusion and lies, 
all this was an intolerable thing. And the worst was 
that she had been cheated of the chance to be really loyal. 
Why had he never told her that she wore a chain? 
Why, when he took her, had he not drawn up his terms 
and made his bargain? She would have kept the bar- 
gain to the letter ; she would have taught herself to be 
his wife. Duty then would have been duty ; sentiment 
would have been sentiment ; her youth would not have 
been so wretchedly misspent. She would have given up 
her heart betimes; doubtless it would have learned to 
beat to a decent aud satisfied measure ; but now it had 
throbbed to a finer music, a melody that would ring iu 
her ears forever. Thinking of what her conscience might 
have done, however, brought her to thinking of what it 
might still do. While she turned in her pain, angrily 
questioning it, Mrs. Keith knocked at the door. Nora 
repaired to the dressing-glass, to efiace the traces of her 
tears ; and while she stood there, she saw in her open 
dressing-case her last letter from her cousin. It gave 
her the help she was vaguely groping for. By the time 
she had crossed the room and opened the door she had 
welcomed and blessed this help; and while she gravely 
shook her head in response to Mrs. Keith's softly urgent, 
" Nora, dear, won't you let me come to you ? " she had 
passionately made it her own. "I would rather be 
alone," she said ; " I thank you very much." 

It was past six o'clock ; Mrs. Keith was dressed for 
the evening. It was her gracious practice on Sundays to 



WATCH AND WARD. 173 

dine with her mother-in-law. Nora knew, therefore, that 
if her companion accepted this present dismissal, she 
would be alone for several hours. 

" Can't I do something for you ? " Mrs. Keith in 
quired, soothingly. 

" Nothing at all, thank you. You are very kind." 

Mrs. Keith looked at her, wondering whether this was 
the irony of bitter grief; but a certain cold calmness in 
the young girl's face, overlying her agitation, seemed to in- 
timate that she had taken a wise resolve. And, in fact, 
Nora was now soaring sublime on the wings of purpose, 
and viewed Mrs. Keith's offence as a diminished fact. 
Mrs. Keith took her hands. "Write him a line, my 
dear," she gently urged. 

Nora nodded. " Yes, I will write him a line." 

" And when I come back, it will be all over ? " 

« Yes, — all over." 

" God bless you, my dear." And on this theological 
amenity the two women kissed and separated. Nora 
returned to her dressing-case and read over her cousin's 
letter. Its clear friendliness seemed to ring out audibly 
amid this appalling hush of familiar harmony. " I wish 
you might know a day's friendliness or a day's freedom, 
— a j)oor devil who is your natural protector." Here was 
indeed the voice of nature, of predestined tenderness ; if 
her cousin had been there Nora would have flung herself , 
into his arms. She sat down at her writing-table, with 
her brow in her hands, light, headed with her passionate 
purpose, steadying herself to think. A day's freedom 
had come at last; a lifetime's freedom confronted her. 
For, as you will have guessed, immediate retrocession 



174 WATCH AND WARD. 

and departure had imperiously prescribed themselves. 
Until this had taken place, there could be nothing but 
deeper trouble. On the old terms there could be no 
clearing up ; she could speak to Roger again only in per- 
fect independence. She must tlirow off those suffocating 
bounties which had been meant to bribe her to the service 
in wliich she had so miserably failed. Her failure now 
she felt no impulse to question, her decision no energy 
to revise. I shall have told ray story ill if these things 
seem to bck logic. Tlie fault lay deeper and dated from 
longer ago tlian her morning's words of denial. Roger 
and she shared it between them ; it was a heavy burden 
for both. 

She wrote her " line/* as she had promised Mrs Keith, 
rapidly, without erasure ; then wrote anotlier to Mrs. 
Keith, folded and directed them and kid them on her 
dressing-table. She remembered now, distinctly, that she 
had heard of a Sunday-evening train to New York. Sfie 
hastened down stairs, found in a newspaper the railway 
advertisement, and learned that the train started at eight ; 
satisfied herself, too, that the coast was clear of servants, 
and that she might depart unquestioned. She bade a 
gleeful farewell to her borrowed possessions, — unearned 
wages, ineffective lures. She exchanged the dress she 
bad worn to church for an old black silk one, put a few 
articles of the first necessity into a small travelling-bag, 
and emptied her purse of alh save a few dollars. Then 
bonneted, shawled, veiled, with her bag in her hand, she 
went forth into the street. She would begin as she would 
have to proceed ; she started for the station, savingly, on 
foot. Happily it was not far off; she reached it through 



WATCH AND WARD. 175 

the wintry darkness, out of breatli, but in safely. She 
seemed to feel about her, as she went, the old Bohemian- 
ism of her childhood; she was once more her father's 
daughter. She bought her ticket and found a seat in the 
train without adventure ; with a sort of shame, in fact, 
that this great deed of hers should be so easy to do. But 
as the train rattled hideously through the long wakeful 
hours of the night, difficulties came thickly ; in the mere 
oppression of her conscious purpose, in the keener vision 
at moments of Roger's distress, in a vague dread of the 
great unknown into which she was rushing. But she 
could do no other, — no other; with this refrain she 
lulled her doubts. It was strange how, as the night 
elapsed and her heart-beats seemed to keep time to the 
crashing swing of the train, her pity for Roger increased. 
It would have been an immense relief to be able to hate 
him. Her undiminished affection, forced back upon her 
heart, swelled and rankled there tormentingly. But if 
she was unable to hate Roger, she could at least abuse 
herself. Every circumstance of the last six years, in this 
new light, seemed to have taken on a vivid meaning, — a 
meaning that made a sort of crime of her own want of 
foreknowledge. She kept thinking of expiation, and de- 
termined she would write to Miss Murray, her former 
schoolmistress, and beg that she might come and teach 
little girls their scales. She Jcept her cousin's letter 
clinched in her hand ; but even when she was not thinking 
of Roger she was not always thinking of Fenton. She 
could tell Hubert Lawrence now that she was as poor and 
friendless as he had ever wished he could see her. 

Toward morning she fell asleep for wearmess. She 



176 WATCH AND WARD. 

was roused by a great tumult and tbe stopping of the 
train, which had arrived. She found with dismay that, 
as it was but seven o'clock, she had two or three hours 
on her hands. George would hardly be at his place of 
business before ten, and the interval seemed formidable. 
The dusk of a wiuter's morning lingered still, and in- 
creased her trouble. But she followed her companions 
and stood in the street. Half a dozen hackmen attacked 
her; a facetious gentleman, lighting a cigar, asked her if- 
she would n't take a carriage with him. 

She made her escape from the bustle and hurried along 
the street, praying to be unnoticed. She told herself 
sternly that now her difl&culties had begun and must be 
bravely faced ; but as she stood at the street-comer, be- 
neath an unextinguished lamp, listening to the nascent 
hum of the town, she felt a most unreasoned sinking of 
the heart. A Dutch grocer, behind her, was l)eginning 
to open his shop; an ash-barrel stood beside her, and 
while she lingered an old woman with a filthy bag on her 
back came and poked in it with a stick ; a policeman, 
muffled in a comforter, came lounging squarely along Ihe 
pavement and took her slender measure with his hard 
official eye. What a hideous, sordid world ! She was 
afraid to do anything but walk and walk. Fortunately, 
in New York, in the upper region, it is impossible to lose 
one's way ; and she knew that by keeping downward and 
to the right she should reach her appointed refuge. The 
streets looked shabby and of ill-repute ; the houses seemed 
mean and sinister. When, to fill her time, she stopped 
before the window of some small shop, the objects within 
seemed, in their ugliness, to mock at her unnatural re- 



WATCH AND WARD. 177 

finement. She must give that up. At last she began to 
feel faint and hungry, for she had fasted since the previous 
morning. She ventured into an establishment which had 
Ladiei Cafe inscribed in gilt letters on a blue tablet in 
the window, and justified its title by an exhibition of stale 
pies and fly-blown festoons of tissue-paper. On her re- 
quest, humbly preferred, for a cup of tea, she was served 
stariogly and condescendingly by a half-dressed young 
woman, with frowzy hair and tumid eyes. The tea was 
bad, yet Nora swallowed it, not to complicate the situation. 
The young woman had come and sat down at her table, 
handled her travelling-bag, and asked a number of plain 
questions ; among others, if she would n't like to go up 
and lie down. " I guess it 's a dollar," said this person, 
to conclude her achievements, alluding to the cup of tea. 
Nora came afterwards to a square,. in which was an en- 
closure containing trees, a frozen fountain, thawing fast, 
and benches. She went in and sat down on one of the 
benches. Several of the others were occupied by shabby 
men, sullen with fasting, with their hands thrust deep into 
their pockets, swinging their feet for warmth. She felt 
a faint fellowship in their grim idleness ; but the fact that 
they were all men and she the only woman, seemed to 
open out deeper depths in her loneliness. At last, when 
it was nine o'clock, she made her way to Tenth Avenue 
and to Geoi^e's address. It was a neighborhood of store- 
houses and lumber-yards, of wholesale traffic in articles 
she had never heard of, and of multitudinous carts, drawn 
up along the pavement. She found a large cheap-looking 
sign in bkck and white, — Frankt and Fenton. Beneath 
it was an alley, and at the end of this alley a small office 



178 WATCH AND WABD. 

which seemed to communicate with an extension of the 
precinct in the rear. The office was open ; a small ragged 
boy was sweeping it with a broom. From him she learned 
that neither Franks nor Fenton had arrived, bat that if 
she wanted, she might come in and wait. She sat down 
in a corner, tremulous with conjecture, and scanned the 
room, trying to bridge over this dull interval with some 
palpable memento of lier cousin. But the desk, the stove^ 
the iron safe, the chairs, the sordid ink-spotted walls, 
were as blank and impersonal as so many columns of fig- 
ures. When at last the door opened and a man appeared^ 
it was not Fenton, but, presumably, Franks. Mr. Franks 
was a small meagre man, with a whitish coloring, weak 
blue eyes and thin yellow whiskers, suffering apparently 
from some nervous malady. He nodded, he stumbled, he 
jerked his arms and legs about with pitiful comicality. 
He had a huge protuberant forehead, such a forehead as 
would have done honor to a Goethe or a Newton ; but 
poor Mr. Franks must have been at best a mai^ of latent 
genius. Superficially he was a very witless person. He 
informed Nora, on learning her errand, that his part- 
ner (" pardner," he called it) was gone to Williamsburg 
on business, and would not return till noon ; meanwhile, 
was it anything he could do ? Nora's heart sank at this 
vision of comfort still deferred ; but she thanked Mr. 
Franks, and begged leave to sit in her comer and wait. 
Her presence seemed to redouble his agitation ; she re- 
mained for an hour gazing in painful fascination at his 
unnatural shrugs and spasms, as he busied himself at his 
desk. The Muse of accounts, for poor Mr. Franks, was, 
in fact, not habitually a young woman, thrice beautiful 



WATCH AND WARD. 179 

with trouble, sitting so sensibly at bis elbow. Nora won- 
dered how Greorge had come to choose so foolish an asso- 
ciate ; then she guessed that it was his want of capital 
that had discovered a secret affinity with Mr. Eranks's 
want of brains. The merciless intensity of thought be- 
gotten by her excitement suggested that there was some- 
thing dishonorable in this connection. From time to time 
Mr. Pranks wheeled about in his chair and fixed her sol- 
emnly with his pallid glance, as if to offer her the privilege 
of telling him her story ; and on her failure to avail her- 
self of it, turned back to his ledger with a little grunt of 
injury and a renewal of his grotesque agitation. As 
the morning wore away, various gentlemen of the kind 
designated as *' parties " came in and demanded Fenton, 
in a tone that made the smallest possible account of Mr. 
Franks. Several of them sat awhile on tilted chairs, 
chewing their toothpicks, stroking their beards, and lis- 
tening with a half-bored grin to what appeared to be an 
intensely confidential exposition of Mr. Franks*s wrongs. 
One of them, as he departed, gave Nora a wink, as if to 
imply that the state of affairs between the two members 
of the firm was so broad a joke that even a pretty young 
woman might enjoy it. At last, when they had been alone 
again for half an hour, Mr. Franks closed with a slap the 
great leathern flanks of his account-book, and sat a moment 
burying his head in his arms. Then he suddenly rose and 
stood before the young girl. " Mr. Fenton 's your cousin, 
Miss, you say, eh P Well, then, let me tell you that your 
cousin 's a swindler ! I can prove it to you on those 
books I Nice books they are ! Where is my money, 
thirty thousand dollars that I put into this d — ^d hum- 



180 WATCH AND WABD. 

bug of a business P What is tbere to sbow for it ? I baye 
been made a fool of, — as if I was n*t fool enough already." 
The tears stood in his eyes, he stamped with the bitter- 
ness of his spite ; and then, thrusting his hat on his head 
and giving Nora's amazement no time to reply, he darted 
out of the door and went up the alley. Nora saw him 
from the window, looking up and down the street. Sud- 
denly, while he stood and while she looked, George came 
up. Mr. Franks's fury seemed suddenly to evaporate ; 
be received bis companion's hand-shake and nodded to- 
ward the office, as if to tell of Nora's being there ; while, 
to her surprise, George hereupon, without looking toward 
the window, turned back into the street. In a few 
minutes, however, he reappeared alone, and in another 
moment he stood before her. " Well ! " he cried ; ** here 
you are, then ! " 

" George," she said, "I have taken you at your word." 

"My word ? O yes 1 " cried George, bravely. 

She saw that be was changed, and not for the better. 
He looked older, he was better dressed and more pros- 
perous ; but as Nora looked at him, she felt that she had 
asked too much of her imagination. He eyed her from 
bead to foot, and in a moment he had noted her simple 
dress and lier pale face. "What on earth has hap- 
pened ? " he asked, closing the door with a kick. 

Nora hesitated, feeling that, with words, tears might 
come. 

"You are sick," he said, "or you are going to be 
sick." 

This horrible idea belped her to recall her self-control. 
"I have left Mr. Lawrence," she said. 



WATCH AND WARD. 181 

" So I see ! " said George, wavering between relish 
and disapproval Wlien, a few moments before, liis 
pailner had told him that a young lady was in the office, 
calling herself his cousin, he had straightway placed 
himself on his guard. The case was delicate ; so that, 
instead of immediately advancing, he had retreated be- 
hind a green baize door twenty yards off, had "taken 
something," and briskly meditated. She had taken him 
at his word; he knew that before she told him. But 
confound his word if it came to this! It had been meant, 
not as an invitation to put herself under his care, but as 
a kind of specuhitive "feeler." Fenton, however, had 
a native sympatliy with positive measures ; and he felt, 
moreover, the instinct to angle in Nora's troubled 
waters. " What 's the matter now P " he asked. " Have 
you quarrelled ? " 

" Don't call it a quarrel, George !' He is as kind, he 
is kinder than ever," Nora cried. "But what do you 
think P He has asked me to marry him." 

" Eh, my dear, I told you he would." 

" I did n't believe you. I ought to have believed you. 
But it is not only that. It is that, years ago, he adopted 
me with that view. He brought me up for that purpose. 
He has done everything for me on that condition. I was 
to pay my debt and be his wife. I never dreamed of it. 
And now at last that I have grown up and he makes his 
6laim, I can't, I can't 1 " 

" You can't, eh ? So you have left liim ! " 

" Of course I have left him. It was the only thing to 
do. It was give and take. I cannot give what he wants, 
and I cannot give back what I have received. But I 
can refuse to take more." 



182 WATCH AND WARD. 

!Fenton sat on the edge of bis desk, swinging his leg. 
He folded his arms and whistled a lively air, looking at 
Nora with a brightened eye. " I see, I see," he said. 

Telling her tale bad deepened her color and added to 
her beauty. " So here I am," she went on. " I know 
that I am dreadfully alone, that I am homeless and help- 
less. But it's a heaven to living as I have lived. I 
have been content all these days, because I thought I 
could content him. But we ^ever understood each other. 
He has given me immeasurable happiness ; I know that ; 
and he knows that I know it ; don't you think he knows, 
George?" she cried, eager even in her reserve. "I 
would have made him a sister, a friend. But I don't 
expect you to understand all this. It 's enough that I 
am satisfied. I am satisfied," the poor girl repeated ve- 
hemently. " I have no illusions about it now ; you can 
trust me, George. I mean to earn my own living. I 
can teach; I am a good musician; I want above all 
things to work. I shall look for some employment with- 
out delay. All this time I might have been writing to Miss 
Murray. But I was sick with impatience to see you. 
To come to you was the only thing I could do; but I 
shall not trouble you for long." 

Eenton seemed to have but half caught the meaning of 
this impassioned statement, for simple admiration of her 
exquisite purity of purpose was fast getting the better of 
his caution. He gave his knee a loud slap. " Nora," 
he said, ** you 're a wonderful young lady ! " 

For a moment she was silent and thoughtful. " For 
mercy's sake," she cried at last, " say nothing to make 
me feel that I have done this thing too easily, too proudly 



WATCH AND WARD. 183 

and recklessly ! Eeally, I am auytliiug but brave. I am 
full of doubts and fears." 

"You're uncommonly handsome; that's one sure 
thing ! " said Fen ton. " I would rather marry you than lose 
you. Poor Mr. Lawrence ! " Nora turned away in silence 
and walked to the window, whicli grew to her eyes, for 
the moment, as the " glimmering square " of the poet. 
" I thought you loved him so ! " he added, abruptly. 
Nora turned back with an effort and a blush. " If he 
were to come to you now," he went on, " and go down 
on his knees and beg and plead and rave and all that sort 
of thing, would you still refuse him ? " 

She covered her face with her hands. ** O George, 
George ! " she cried. 

" He will follow you, of course. He will not let you 
go so easily." 

" Possibly ; but I have begged him solemnly to let me 
take my way. Roger is not one to rave and rage. At 
all events, I shall refuse to see him now. A year hence 
I will think of it. His great desire will be, of course, 
that I don't suffer. I shall not suffer." 

"By Jove, not if I can help it! " cried Fenton, with 
warmth. Nora answered with a faint, grave smile, and 
stood looking at him in appealing silence. He colored 
beneath her glance with the pressure of his thoughts. 
They resolved themselves chiefly into tlie recurring ques- 
tion, " What can be made of it ? " While he was await- 
ing inspiration, he took refuge in a somewhat inexpensive 
piece of gallantry. " By the way, you must be hungry." 

" No, I am not hungry," said Nora, " but I am tired. 
You must find me a lodging, — in some quiet hotel.' 



184 WATCH AND WARD. 

" 0, you shall be qniet enougli,** he answered ; but he 
insisted that unless, meanwhile, she took some dinner, he 
should have her ill on his hands. They quitted the office, 
and he hailed a hack, which drove them oyer to the upper 
Broadway region, where they were soon established in a 
well-appointed restaurant They made, however, no very 
hearty meal. Nora's hunger of the morning had passed 
away in fever, and Eenton himself was, as he would have 
expressed it, off his feed. Nora's head had begun to 
ache ; she had removed her bonnet, and sat facing him 
at their small table, leaning wearily against the wall, her 
plate neglected, her arms folded, her bright expanded 
eyes consulting the uncertain future. He noted narrowly 
how much prettier she was ; but more even than by her 
prettiness he was struck by her high spirit. This be- 
longed to an order of things in which he felt no commis- 
sion to dabble ; but in a creature of another sort he was 
free to admire such a luxury of conscience. In man or 
woman the capacity then and there to act was the thing 
he most relished. Nora had not faltered and wavered ; 
she had chosen, and here she sat. It was an irritation 
to him to feel that he was not the manner of man for 
whom such a girl would bum her ships ; for, as he looked 
askance at her beautiful absent eyes, he more than sus- 
pected that there was a positive as well as a negative side 
to her refusal of her friend. Poor Roger had a happier 
counterpart. It was love, and not indifference, that had 
pulled the wires of her adventure. Fenton, as we have 
intimated, was one who, when it suited him, could ride 
rough-shod to his mark. " You have told me half your 
story,^' he said, " but your eyes tell tlie rest. You 'ti not 
be Roger's wife, but you '11 not die an old maid." 



WATCH AND WARD. 185 

Nora blnslied, but she answered simply, '* Please don't 
saj that." 

" My dear girl," he said, "I religiously respect your 
secrets." But, in truth, he only half respected theui. 
Stirred as he was by her beauty and by that sense of 
feminine appealingness which may be an inspiring motive 
even to a very shabby fellow, he was keenly mortified by 
feeling that her tenderness passed him by, barely touch- 
ing him with the hem of its garment. She was doing 
mighty fine things, but she was using him, her hard, vul- 
gar cousin, as a senseless steppiug-stone. These reflec- 
tions quickened his appreciation of her charm, but took 
the edge from his delicacy. As they rose to go, Nora, 
who in spite of her absent eyes had watched him well, felt 
that cousinship had melted to a mere name. George had 
been to her maturer vision a painful disappointment. His 
face, from the moment of their meeting, had given her 
warning to withdraw her trust. Was it she or he who 
had changed since that fervid youthful parting of sixteen 
months before P She, in the interval, had been refined 
by life; he had been vulgarized. She had seen the 
world ; she had known better things and better men ; she 
had known Hubert, and, more than ever, she had known 
Sx>ger. But as she drew on her gloves she reflected with 
horror that distress was making her fastidious. She 
wished to be coarse and careless ; she wished that she 
might have eaten a heavy dinner, that she might enjoy 
taking George's arm. And the slower flowed the cur- 
rent of her confidence, the softer dropped her words. 
" Now, dear George," she said, with a desperate attempt 
at a cheerful smile, " let me know where you mean to 
take me." 



186 WATCH AND WARD. 

" Upon my soul, Nora," he said, with a hard grin, " I 
feel as if I had a jewel I must lay in soft cotton. The 
thing is to find it soft enough." Greorge himself, perhaps, 
she might endure ; but she had a growing horror of his 
friends. Among them, probably, were the female correla- 
tives of the " parties ** who had come to chat with Mr. 
Pranks. She prayed he might not treat her to company. 
** You see I want to do the pretty thing," he went on. 
"I want to treat you, by Jove, as I would treat a queen ! 
I can't thrust you all alone into an hotel, and I can't put 
up at one with you, — can I ? " 

" I am not in a position to be fastidious," said Nora. 
" I shall not object to going alone." 

" No, no ! " he cried, with a flourish of his hand. " I 
will do for you what I would do for my own sister. I am 
not a fine gentleman, but I know what 's proper. I live 
in the house of a lady who lets out rooms, — a very nice 
little woman; she and I are great cronies; I'm sure 
you '11 like her. She will give you the comforts of a 
home, and all that sort of thing." 

Nora's heart sauk, but she assented. They re-entered 
their carriage, and a drive of moderate length brought 
them to a brownstone dwelling of the third order of gen- 
tility, as one may say, stationed in a cheap and serried 
row. In a few moments, in a sqnall tawdry front parlor, 
Nora was introduced to George's hostess, the nice little 
woman, Mrs. Paul by name. Nice enough she seemed, 
for Nora's comfort. She was young and fair, plump and 
comely ; she wore a great many ringlets. She was a 
trifle too loving on short acquaintance, perhaps; but, 
after all,^ thought Nora, who was she now, to complain 



WATCH AND WARD. 187 

of that ? When the two women had gone up stairs, Ten- 
ton put on his hat, — he could never meditate without it 
(he had written that last letter to Nora with his beaver 
resting on the bridge of his nose), — and paced slowly 
up and down the narrow entry, chewing the end of a 
cigar, with his hands in his pockets and his eyes on the 
ground. In ten minutes Mrs. Paul reappeared. " Well, 
sir," she cried, " what does all this mean ? " 

" It means money, if you *ll not scream so loud," he 
answered. " Come in here." They went into the parlor 
and remained there for a couple of hours with closed 
doors. At last Fenton came forth and left the house. 
He walked along the street, humming gently to himself. 
Dusk had fallen ; he stopped beneath a lighted lamp at 
the comer, looked up and down a moment, and then ex- 
haled a deep, an almost melancholy sigh. Having thus 
relieved his conscience, he proceeded to business. He 
consulted his watch ; it was five o'clock. An empty hack 
rolled by ; he called it and got in, breathing the motto of 
great spirits, " Confound the expense ! " His business 
led him to visit successively several of the best hotels. 
Roger, he argued, starting immediately in pursuit of 
Nora, would have taken the first train from Boston, and 
would now have been more than an hour in town. Fen- 
ton could, of course, proceed only by probabilities ; but 
according to these, Roger was to be found at one of the 
establishments I have mentioned. Fenton knew his New 
York, and, from what he knew of Roger, be believed him 
to be at the "quietest " of these. Here, in fact, he found 
his name freshly registered. He would give him time, 
however ; he would take time himself. He stretched his 



188 WATCH AND WARD. 

long legs awhile on one of the divans in the hall. At last 
Ex)ger appeared, strolling gloomily down the corridor, 
with his eyes on the ground. For a moment Fenton 
scarcely recognized him. He was pale and grave ; dis- 
tress had already made him haggard. Eenton observed 
that, as he passed, people stared at him. He walked 
slowly to the street door ; whereupon Fenton, fearing he 
might lose him, followed him, and stood for a moment 
behind him. Roger turned suddenly, as if from an in- 
stinct of the other's nearness, and the two faced each, 
other. Those dumb eyes of Roger's for once were elo- 
quent. They glowed like living coals. 





|HE good lady wLo enjoyed the sinecure of being 
mother-in-law to Mrs. Keith passed on that es- 
pecial Sunday an exceptionally dull evening. 
Her son's widow was oppressed and preoccupied, and 
took an early leave. Mrs. Keith's first question on 
reaching home was as to whether Nora had left her 
room. On learning that she had quitted the house alone, 
after dark, Mrs. Keith made her way, stirred by vague 
conjecture, to the empty chamber, where, of course, she 
speedily laid her hands on those two testamentary notes 
to which allusion has been made. In a moment she had 
read the one addressed to herself. Perturbed as she 
was, she yet could not repress au impulse of intelligent 
applause. " Ah, how character plays the cards ! " she 
mused. "How a good girl's very errors set her off ! " If 
Roger longed for Nora to-day, who could measure the 
morrow's longing? He might enjoy, however, without 
waiting for the morrow, this refinement of desire. In 
spite of the late hour, Mrs. Keith repaired to his abode, 
armed with the other letter, deeming this, at such a mo- 
ment, a more gracious course than to send for him. The 
letter Roger found to be brief but pregnant. "Dear 



190 WATCH AND WARD. 

Roger," it ran, " I learned tbis afternoon the secret of 
all these years, — too late for our happiness. I have 
been strangely blind ; you have been too forbearing, — 
generous where you should have been strictly just. I 
never dreamed of what this day would briug. Now, I 
umst leave you ; I can do nothing else. Tbis is no time 
to thank you for what you have been to me, but I shall 
live to do so yet. Dear Ex>ger, get married, and send me 
your children to teach. I shall live by teaching. I have 
a family, you know ; I go to New York to-night. I write 
this on my knees, imploring you to be happy. One of 
these days, when I have learned to be myself again, we 
shall be better friends than ever. I beg you, I beg you, 
not to follow me." 

Mrs. Keith sat a long time with her host. For the 
first time in her knowledge of him she saw Roger violent, 
— violent ^ith horror and self-censure and vain impre^ 
cation. " Take her at her word," she said ; " don't follow 
her. Let her knock against the world a Uttle, and she 
will have you yet." 

This pliilosophy seemed to Roger too stoical by half ; 
to sit at home and let Nora knock against the world was 
more than be could undertake. " Wlietber she will have 
me or not," he said, " I must bring her back. I am 
morally responsible for her. Good God! think of her 
afloat in that horrible city with that rascal of a half- 
cousin — her 'family' she calls him! — for a pilot!" 
He took, of course, the first train to New York, How 
to proceed, where to look, was a hard question ; but to 
linger and waver was agony. He was haunted, as he 
went, with dreadful visions of what might have befallen 



WATCH AND WARD. 191 

ber ; it seemed to him tbat be bad never loved ber be- 
fore. 

Fenton, as he recognized him, was a comfortable sight, 
in spite of bis detested identity. He was better than 
uncertainty. " You have news for me 1 ** Roger cried. 
" Wliere is she ? " 

Fenton looked aboat him at his leisure, feeling, agree- 
ably, that now he held the cards. " Grently," he said. 
" Had n't we better retire ? " Upon which Bx)ger, grasp- 
ing his arm with grim devotion, led him to his own apart- 
ment. " I rather hit it,'* George went on. " I am not 
the fool you once tried to make me seem." 

" Where is she, — tell me that ! " Bx)ger repeated. 

" Allow me, dear sir," said Fenton, settling himself in 
spacious vantage. " If I have come here to oblige you, 
you must let me take my own way. You don't suppose 
I have rushed to meet you for the pleasure of the tbing. 
I owe it to my cousin, in the first place, to say that I 
have come without her knowledge." 

" If you mean only to torture me," Roger answered, 
*' say so outright. Is she well ? is she safe ? " 

"Safe? the safest creature in the city, sir! A de- 
lightful home, maternal care ! " 

Roger wondered whether Fenton was making horrible 
sport of his trouble ; he turned cold at the thought of 
maternal care of his providing. But he admonished him- 
self to lose nothing by arrogance. "I thank you ex- 
tremely for your kindness. Nothing remains but that I 
-should see her." 

" Nothing, indeed ! You are very considerate. You 
know tbat she particularly objects to seeing you." 



192 WATCH AND WARD. 



" Possibly ! But tbat is for her to say. I claim the 
right to take the refusal from her own lips." 

Fenton looked at him with an impudent parody of 
compassion. '* Don 't you think you have had refusals 
enough ? You roust enjoy them 1 " 

Roger turned away with an imprecation, but he con- 
tinued to swallow his impatience. ''Mr. Fenton," he 
said, " you have not come here, I know, to waste words, 
nor have I to waste temper. You see before you a des- 
perate man. Come, make the most of me ! I am will- 
ing, I am delighted, to be fleeced ! You will help me, 
but not for nothing. Name your terms." 

Fenton flinched, but he did not protest ; he only gave 
himself the luxury of swaggering a little. " Well, you 
see," he answered, " my assistance is worth something. 
Let me explain how much. You will never guess ! I 
know your story ; Nora has told me everything, — every- 
thing ! We have had a great talk. Let me give you a 
little hint of my story, — and excuse egotism ! You pro- 
posed to her ; she refused you. You offered her money, 
luxury, a position. She knew you, she liked you enor-^ 
mously, yet she refused you flat ! Now reflect on this." 

There was something revolting to Bxiger in seeing liis 
adversary profaning these sacred mysteries ; he protested. 
** I have reflected, quite enough. You can tell me noth* 
ing. Her affections," he added stiffly, to make an end 
of it, " were pre-engaged." 

''Exactly! You see how that complicates matters. 
Poor, dear little Nora ! " And Fenton gave a twist to 
his mustache. " Imagine, if you can, how a man placed 
as I am feels toward a woman, — toward tie woman! 



J 



WATCH AND WARD. 193 

If lie reciprocates, it 's love, it *s passion, it *8 what you 
will, but it 's common enough ! But when he does n't 
repay her in kind, when he can't, poor devil, it 's — it 's 
— upon my word," cried Fenton, slapping his knee, " it 's 
chivalry 1" *^ •„ 

Tor some moments Roger failed to appreciate the re- 
markable purport of these observations ; then, suddenly, 
it dawned upon him. " Do I understand you," he asked, 
in a voice gentle by force of wonder, ** that you are the 
man?" 

Eenton squared himself in his chair. " Yon have hit 
it, sir. I am the man, — the happy, the uu happy man. 
D ^n it, sir, it 's not my fault 1 " 

Roger stood staring ; Fenton felt his eyes penetrating 
him to the core. " Excuse me," said Roger, at last, " if 
I suggest your giving me some slight evidence in support 
of this extraordinary claim 1 " 

" Evidence ? is n't there about evidence enough ? 
When a young girl gives up home and friends and for- 
tune and — and reputation, and rushes out into the world 
to throw herself into a maa's arms, it seems to me you 
have got your evidence. But if you '11 not take my word, 
you may leave it ! I may look at the matter once too 
often, let me tell you ! I admire Nora with all my heart ; 
I worship the ground she treads on; but I confess I'm 
afraid of her ; she 's too good for pie ; §he was meant for 
a finer gentleman than I ! By which I ^o\\% mean yo», 
of necessity. But you have been good to her, and you 
have a claim. It has been cancelled in a measure; but 
you wish to set it up again. Now you see that I stand 
in your way; that if I had a miud to, I miglit stan4 



194 WATCH AND WARD. 

there forever ! Hang it, sir, I am playing tbe part of a 
saint. I have but a word to say to settle my case, and 
to settle yours. But I have my eye on a lady neither 
so young nor so pretty as my cousin, yet whom I can 
marry with a better conscience, for site expects no more 
than I can give her. Nevertheless, I don't answer for 
myself. A man isn't a saint every day in the week. 
Talk about conscience when a beautiful girl sits gazing 
at you through a mist of tears ! O, you have yourself to 
thank for it all ! A year and a half ago, if you had n't 
treated me like a swindler, Nora would have been content 
to treat me like a friend. But women have a fancy .for 
^ au outlaw. You turned me out of doors, aud Nora's 
heart went with me. It has followed me ever since. 
Here I sit with my ugly face aud hold it in my hand. 
As I say, I don't quite know what to do with it. You 
propose an arrangement, I inquire your terms. A maa 
loved is a man listened to. If I were to say to Nora to- 
morrow, * My dear girl, you have made a mistake. You 
are in a false position. Go back to Mr. Lawrence di- 
rectly, and then we will talk about it ! ' she would look 
at me a moment with those beautiful eves of hers, she 
would sigh, she would gather herself up like a princess 
on trial for treason, remanded to prison, — and she would 
march to your door. Once she *s within it, it 's your own 
affair. That 's what I can do. Now what can you do ? 
Come, something handsome ! " 

Eenton spoke loud and fast, as if to outstrip self-con- 
tempt. Roger listened amazedly to this tissue of falsity, 
impudence, aud greed, and at last, as Fenton paused, and 
he seemed to see Nora's very image turning away with 



WATCH AND WARD. 195 

a shudder, his disgust broke forth. " Upon my word, 
sir," he cried, "you go too far; you ask too mucli. 
Nora in love with you, — you, who have n't the grace 
even to lie decently ! Tell me she *s ill, she *s lost, she 's 
dead; but don't tell me she can look at you without 
horror I " 

Tenton rose and stood for a moment, glaring with 
auger at his useless self-exposure. For an instant, Roger 
expected a tussle. But Eenton deemed that he could 
deal harder vengeance than by his fists. " Very good ! ** 
he cried. ** You have chosen. I don't mind vour words ; 
you *re an ass at best, and of course you are twenty times 
an ass when you are put out by a disagreeable truth. 
But you are not such a fool, I guess, as not to repent ! " 
And Fenton made a rather braver exit than you might 
have expected. 

Roger's recent vigil with Mrs. Keith had been dismal 
enough ; but he was yet to learn that a sleepless night 
may contain deeper possibilities of suffering. He had 
flung back Fenton's words, but they returned to the 
charge. When once the gate is opened to self-torture, 
the whole army of fiends files in. Before morning he had 
fairly out-Fentoned Fenton. There was no discretion in 
his own love ; why should there be in Nora's P We love 
as we must, not as we should ; and she, poor girl, might 
have bowed to the common law. In the morning he 
slept awhile for weariness, but he awoke to a world of 
agitation. If Fenton's tale was true, and if, at Mrs. 
Keith's instigation, his own suspicions had done Hubert 
wrong, he would go to Hubert, pour out his woes, and 
demand aid and comfort. He must move to find rest. 



196 WATCH Als^D WARP. 

Hubert's lodging was far up town ; Roger started on foot. 
The weather was perfect ; one of those happy days of 
February which seem to snatch a mood from May, — a 
day when any sorrow is twice a sorrow. The winter was 
melting and trickling ; you heard on all sides, in the still 
sunshine, the raising of windows ; on the edges of oppos- 
ing house-tops rested a vault of vernal blue. Where was 
she hidden, in the vast bright city ? The streets and 
crowds and houses that concealed her seemed hideous. 
He would have beggared himself for the sound of her 
voice, though her words might damn him. When at last 
he reached Hubert's dwelling, a sudden sense of all that 
he risked checked his steps. Hubert, after all, and Hu- 
bert alone, was a possible rival, and it would be sad 
work to put the torch into his hands ! So he turned 
heavily back to the Fifth Avenue and kept his way to the 
Park. Here, for some time he walked about, heeding, 
feeling, seeing nothing but the glaring, mocking bright- 
ness of the day. At last he sat down on a bench ; the 
delicious mildness of the air almost sickened him. It was 
some time before he perceived through the mist of his 
thoughts that two ladies had descended from a carriage 
hard by, and were approaching his bench, — the only 
one near at hand. One of these ladies was of great age 
and evidently infirm; she came slowly, leaning on her 
companion's arm ; she wore a green shade over her eyes. 
The younger lady, who was in the prime of youth and 
beauty, supported her friend with peculiar tenderness. 
As Roger rose to give them place, he dimly observed on 
the young lady's face a movement of recognition, a smile, 
— the smile of Miss Sands I Blushing shghtly, she 



WATCH AND WARD. 197 

frankly greeted him. He met her witli the best grace at 
his command, and felt her eyes, as he spoke, scanning 
the trouble in his aspect. '* There is no need of my in- 
troducing you to my aunt/' she said. " She has lost her 
hearing, and her only pleasure is to bask in the sun." 
She turned and lielped tliis venerable invalid to settle 
lierself on the bench, put a shawl about her, and satisfied 
her feeble needs with filial soHcitude. At the end of ten 
minutes of commonplace talk, relieved however by certain 
intelligent glances on either side, Roger found a kind of 
healing quality in the presence of this agreeable woman. 
At last these sympathetic eye-beams resolved themselves, 
on Miss Sands's part, into speech. " You are either vei-y 
unwell, Mr. Lawrence, or very unhappy." 

Roger hesitated an instant, under the empire of that 
stubborn aversion to complaint which, in his character, 
was half modesty and half philosopliy. But Miss Sands 
seemed to sit there eying him so like the genius of friend- 
ship, that he answered simply, " I am unhappy ! " 

** I was afraid it would come ! " said Miss Sands. " It 
seemed to me when we met, a year ago, that your spirits 
were too high for this life. You know you told me 
something which gives me the right, — I was going to 
say, to be interested ; let me say, at least, to be com- 
passionate." 

" I hardly remember what I told you. I only know 
. that I admired you to a degree which may very well 
have loosened my tongue." 

" 0, it was about the charms of another you spoke ! 
You told me about the young girl to whom you had 
devoted yourself." 



198 WATCH AND WARD. 



(C 



I was dreaming then ; now I am awake ! " Roger 
hung his head and poked the ground with his stick. 
Suddenly he looked up, and she saw that his eyes were 
filled with tears. "Dear lady," he said, "you have 
stirred deep waters ! Don't question me. I am ridicu- 
lous with disappointment and sorrow!" 

She gently laid her hand upon his arm. "Let me 
hear it all 1 I assure you I can't go away and leave you 
sitting here the same image of suicidal despair I found 
you." 

Thus urged, Roger told his story. Her attention 
made him understand it bi;Uer himself, and, as he talked, 
he worked off the superficial disorder of his grief. When 
he came to speak of this dismal contingency of Nora's 
love for her cousin, he threw himself frankly upon Miss 
Sand's pity, upon her wisdom. " Is such a thing possi- 
ble ? " he asked. " Do you believe it ? " 

She raised her eyebrows. " You must remember that 
I know neither Miss Lambert nor the gentleman you speak 
of. I can hardly risk a judgment ; I can only say this, 
that the general effect of your story is to diminish my 
esteem for women, — to elevate my opinion of men." 

" 0, except Nora on one side, and Fenton on the 
other ! Nora is an angel ! " 

Miss Sands gave a vexed smile. " Possibly ! You 
are a man, and you ought to have loved a woman. Angels 
have a good conscience guaranteed them ; they may do 
what they please. If I should except any one, it would 
be Mr. Hubert Lawrence. I met him the other even- 
mg," 

"You think it is Hubert thenP" Roger demanded 
mournfully. 



WATCH AND WARD. 199 

Miss Sands broke into a brilliant laugh. "For an 
angel, Miss Lambert lias u't lost her time on earth ! But 
don't ask me for advice, Mr. Lawrence ; at least not now 
and here. Come and see me to-morrow, or tiiis evening. 
Don't regret having spoken; you may believe at least 
that the burden of your grief is shared. It was too mis- 
erable that at such a time you should be sitting here 
alone, feeding upon your own heart." 

These seemed to Bx)ger excellent words; they lost 
nothing on the speaker's lips. She was indeed extremely 
beautiful; her face, softened by intelligent pity, was 
lighted by a gleam of tender irony of his patience. Was 
he, after all, stupidly patient, ignobly fond ? There was 
in Miss Sands something delightfidly rich and mellow. 
Nora, for an instant, seemed a flighty school-girl. He 
looked about him, vaguely questioning tlie empty air, 
longing for rest, yet dreading forfeiture. He left his 
place and strolled across the dull-colored turf. At the 
base of a tree, on its httle bed of sparse raw verdure, he 
suddenly spied the first violet of the year. He stooped 
and picked it : its mild firm tint was the color of friend- 
ship. He brought it back to Miss Sands, who now had 
risen with her companion and was preparing to return 
to the carriage. He silently offered her the violet, — a 
mere pin's head of bloom ; a passionate throb of his heart 
had told him that this was all he could offer her. She 
took it with a sober smile ; it seemed to grow pale be- 
neath her dark blue eyes. " We shall see you again P " 
she said. 

Roger felt himself blushing to his brows. He had a 
vision on either hand of an offered cup, — the deep-hucd 



200 WATCH AND WARD. 

wine of illusion, — the bitter draught of constanej. A 
certain passionate instinct answered, — an instinct deeper 
than his wisdom, his reason, his virtue, — deep as his 
love. " Not now," he said. " A year hence ! " 

Miss Sands turned away and stood for a moment as 
motionless as some sculptured statue of renunciation. 
Then, passing her arm caressingly round her companion, 
**Come, dear aunt,"' she murmured; "we must go.*' 
This little address to the stone-deaf dame was her single 
tribute to confusion. Roger walked with the ladies to 
their carriage and silently helped them to enter it. He 
noted the affectionate tact with which Miss Sands ad- 
justed her movements to those of her companion. When 
he lifted his hat, his friend bowed, as he fancied, with an 
air of redoubled compassion. She had but imagined his 
prior loss, — she knew his present one ! " She would 
make an excellent wife ! " he said, as the carriage rolled 
away. He stood watching it for some minutes ; then, as 
it wheeled round a turn, he was seized with a deeper, 
sorer sense of his impotent idleness. He would go to 
Hubert with his accusation, if not with his appeaL 






jORA, relieved of, her hostess's company, turned 
the key in her door and went through certain 
motions mechanically suggestive of her being at 
rest and satisfied. She unpacked her little bag and re- 
paired her disordered toilet. She took out her inkstand 
and prepared to write a letter to Miss Murray. But she 
had not written many words before she lapsed into 
sombre thought. Now that she had seen George again 
and judged him, she was coming rapidly to feel that to 
have exchanged Roger's care for his care was, for the 
time, to have paid a scanty compliment to Roger. But 
she took refuge from this reflection in her letter, and 
begged for an immediate reply. From time to time, as 
she wrote, she heard a step in the house, which she sup- 
posed to be George's; it somehow quickened her pen 
and the ardor of her petition. This was just finished 
when Mrs. Paul reappeared, bearing a salver charged 
with tea and toast, — a gracious attention, which Nora 
was unable to repudiate. The lady took advantage of it 
to open a conversation. Mrs. Paul's overtures, as well 
as her tea and toast, were the result of her close confer- 
ence with Fenton ; but though his instructions had made 



202 WATCH AKD WARD. 

a very pretty show as he laid them down, they dwindled 
sensibly in the vivid glare of Nora's mistrust. Mrs. Paul, 
nevertheless, seated herself bravely on the bed and rubbed 
her plump pretty hands like the best little woman in the 
world. But the more Nora looked at her, the less she 
liked her. At the end of ^ve minutes she had conceived 
a horror of her comely stony face, her false smile, her lit- 
tle tulle cap, her artificial ringlets. Mrs. Paul called her 
my dear, and tried to take her hand ; Nora was afraid 
that, the next thing, she would kiss her. With a defiant 
flourish, Nora addressed her letter with Miss Murray's 
venerated title ; " I should like to have this posted, 
please," she said. 

" Give it to me, my dear ; I will attend to it," said 
Mrs. Paul ; and straightway read the address. " I sup- 
pose tliis is your old schoolmistress. Mr. Fenton told 
me all about it." Then, after turning the letter for a 
moment, " Keep it over a day ! " 

" Not an hour," said Nora, with decision. "My time 
is precious." 

"Why, my dear," said Mrs. Paul, "we shall be de- 
lighted to keep you a mouth." 

" You are very good. You know I have my living to 
make." 

" Don't talk about that ! I make m^ living, — I know 
what it means ! Come, let me talk to you as a friend. 
Don't go too far. Suppose, now, you take it all back ? 
Six months hence, it may be too late. If you leave him 
lamenting too long, he '11 marry the first pretty girl he 
sees. They always do, — a man refused is just like a 
widower. They 're not so faithful as the widows ! But 



WATCH AND WARD. 203 

let me tell you it *s not every girl that gets such a cliance ; 
I would have snapped at it. He '11 love you the better, 
you see, for your having led him a little dance. But he 
mustn't dance too long! Excuse the liberty I take; 
but Mr. Fenton and I, you see, are great friends, and I 
feel as if his cousin was ray cousin. Take back this letter 
and give me just one word to post, — Come ! Poor little 
man ! You must have a high opinion of men, my dear, 
to play such a game with this one ! " 

If Bx)ger had wislied for a proof that Nora still cared 
for him, he would have found it in the disgust she felt 
at hearing Mrs. Paul undertake his case. The young 
girl colored with her sense of the defilement of sacred 
things. George, surely, for an hour, at least, might have 
kept her story intact. " Really, madam," she answered, 
" I can't discuss this matter. I am extremely obliged to 
you." But Mrs. Paul was not to be so easily baffled. 
Poor Roger, roaming helpless and hopeless, would have 
been amazed to hear how warmly his cause was being 
urged. Nora, of course, made no attempt to argue the 
case. She waited till the lady had exhausted her elo- 
quence, and then, "I am a very obstinate person," she 
said; "you waste your words. If you go any further I 
shall take offence." And she rose, to signify that Mrg. 
Paul might do likewise. Mrs. Paul took the hint, but 
in an instant she had turned about the hard reverse of 
her fair face, in which defeated self-interest smirked hor- 
ribly. "Bah! you're a silly girl!" she cried; and 
swept out of the room. Nora, after this, determined to 
avoid a second interview with George. Her bad head- 
ache furnished a sufficient pretext for escaping it. Half 



204 WATCH AND WARD. 

an hour later lie knocked at lier door ; quite too loudly, 
she thought, for good taste. When she opened it, he 
stood there, excited, angry, ill-disposed. "I am sorry 
you are ill," he said ; " but a night's rest will put you 
right. I have seen Roger." 

" Roger ! is he here ? " 

** Yes, he 's here. But he don't know where you are. 
Thank the Lord you left him I he 's a brute ! " Nora 
would fain have learned more, — whether he was angry, 
whether he was suffering, whether he had asked to see 
her ; but at these words she shut the door in her cousin's 
face. She liardly dared think of what offered imperti- 
nence this outbreak of Eenton's was the rebound. Her 
night's rest brought little comfort. She wondered 
whether Roger had supposed George to be her appointed 
mediator, and asked herself whether it was not her duty 
to see him once again and bid him a respectfully personal 
farewell. It was a long time after she rose before she 
could bring herself to leave her room. She had a vague 
hope that if she delayed, her companions might have 
gone out. But in the dining-room, in spite of the late 
hour, she found George gallantly awaiting her. He had 
apparently had the discretion to dismiss Mrs. Paul to the 
background, and apologized for her absence by saying 
that she had breakfasted long since and had left the 
house. He seemed to have slept off his wrath and was 
full of brotherly bonhomie. " I suppose you will want 
to know about Roger," he said, when they were seated 
at breakfast. " He had followed you directly, in spite of 
your hope that he would n't ; but it was not to beg you 
to come back. He counts on your repentance, and he 



WATCH AND WARD. 205 

expects you to break down and come to Lim on your 
knees, to beg his pardon and promise never to do it 
again. Pretty terms to marry a man on, for a woman 
of spirit ! But he does n't know his woman, does he, 
Nora? Do you know what he intimated? indeed, he 
came right out with it. That you and I want to make 
a match ! That you 're in love with me. Miss, and ran 
away to marry me. That we expected him to forgive 
us and endow us with a pile of money. But he '11 not 
forgive us, — not he ! We may starve, we and our brats, 
before he looks at us. Much obliged ! We shall thrive, 
for many a year, as brother and sister, sha* n't we, Nora, 
and need neither his money nor his pardon ? " 

In reply to this speech, Nora sat staring in pale amaze- 
ment. "Roger thought," she at last found words to 
say, "that it was to marry you I refused him, — to 
marry you I came to New York ? " 

Fenton, with seven-and-twenty years of impudence at 
his back, had received in his day snubs and shocks of 
various shades of intensity ; but he had never felt in his 
face so chilling a blast of reprobation as this cold disgust 
of Nora's. We know that the scorn of a lovely woman 
makes cowards brave; it may do something towards 
making knaves honest men. "Upon my word, my 
dear," he cried, "I am sorry I hurt your feelings. It 
may be offensive, but it is true." 

Nora wished in after years she had been able to laugh 
at this disclosure ; to pretend, at least, to an exhilaration 
she so little felt. But she remained almost sternly silent, 
with her eyes on her plate, stirring her tea. Roger, 
meanwhile, was walking about under this detestable de- 



206 WATCH ANI> WARD. 

ception. Let him tbink anything but that I " What did 
you reply," she asked, " to this — to this — " 

"To this liandsorae compliment? I replied that I 
only wished it were true; but that I feared I had no 
such luck ! Upon which he told me to go to the Devil, 
— in a tone which implied that he did n't much care if 
you went with me." 

Nora listened to tliis speech in freezing silence. 
" Where is Roger ? " ^he asked at last. 

Fenton shot her a glance of harsh mistrust. " Where 
is he ? What do you want to know that for ? "• 

" Where is he, please ! " she simply repeated. And 
then, suddenly, she wondered how and where it was the 
two men had happened to meet. '' Where did you find 
him P " she went on. " How did it happen ? " 

Fenton drained his cup of tea at one long gulp before 
he answered. " My dear Nora," he said, " it *s all very 
well to be modest, it 's all very well to be proud ; but 
take care you are not ungrateful ! I went purposely to 
look him up. I was convinced he would have followed 
you to beg and implore you, aa I sapposed, to come back. 
I wanted to say to him, ' She 's safe, she 's happy, she 's 
in the best hands. Don't waste your time, your words, 
your hopes. Give her rope. Go quietly home and leave 
things to me. If she gets homesick, I will let you 
know.' You see I 'm frank, Nora ; that 's what I meant 
to say. But I was received with this broadside. I 
found a perfect bluster of injured vanity. * You 're her 

lover, she's your mistress, and be d d to both of 

you I ' " 

That George deliberately lied Nora did not distinctly 



WATCH AND WARD. 207 

say to herself, for she lacked practice in this range of 
incrimination. But she as little said to herself that this 
could be the truth. "I am not ungrateful/* she an- 
swered firmly. " But where was it ? '* 

At this, George pushed back his chair. "Where — 
where? Don*t you believe me? Do you want to go 
and ask him if it *s true ? What is the matter with you, 
anyway ? What are you up to ? Have you put yourself 
into my hands, or not?" A certain manly indignation 
was now kindled in his breast; he was equally angry 
with Roger, with Nora, and with himself; fate had of- 
fered him an overaose of contumely, and he felt a reck- 
less, savage impulse to wring from the occasion that 
oomplimeut to his power which had been so rudely denied 
to his delicacy. " Are you using me simply as a vulgar 
tool ? Don't you care for me the least little bit ? Let 
me suggest that for a girl in your — your ambiguous 
position, you are several shades too proud. Don't go 
back to Ex)ger in a hurry ! You are not the immaculate 
young person you were but two short days ago. Who 
am I, what am I, to the people whose opinion you care 
for ? A very low fellow, my dear ; and yet, in the eyes 
of the world, you have certainly taken up with me. If 
you are not prepared to do more, you should have done 
less. Nora, Nora," he went on, breaking into a vein 
none the less revolting for being more ardent, " I confess 
I don't understand you ! But the more you puzzle me 
the more you fascinate me ; and the less you like me the 
more I love you. What has there been, anyway, be- 
tween you and Lawrence? Hang me if I can under- 
stand ! Are you an angel of purity, or are you the most 
audacious of flirts ? " 



^p 



208 WATCH AND WARD. 



y» 



She had risen before he had gone far. " Spare me, 
she said, " the necessity of hearing your opinions or an- 
swering your questions. Please be a gentleman ! Tell 
me, I once more ieg of you, where Bx)ger is to be 
found ? " 

** Be a gentleman ! " was a galling touch. He placed 
himself before the door. " I refuse the information," he 
said. ''I don't mean to have been played with, to have 
been buffeted hither by Roger and thither by you I I mean 
to make something out of all this. I mean to request you 
to remain quietly in this room. Mrs. Paul will keep you 
company. You did n*t treat her over well, yesterday; 
but, in her way, she is quite as strong as you. Mean- 
while I shall go to our friend. * She *s locked up tight,' 
I will say ; 'she 's as good as in jail. Give me five thou- 
sand dollars and I *11 let her out.' Of course he will be- 
gin to talk about legal proceedings. Then I will tell him 
that he is welcome to take legal proceedings if he does n't 
mind the exposure. The exposure won't be pleasant for 
you, Nora, you know ; for the public takes things in the 
lump. It won't hurt me ! " 

" Heaven forgive you ! " murmured Nora, for all re- 
sponse to this explosion. It made a hideous whirl about 
her ; but she felt that to advance in the face of it was 
her best safety. It sickened rather than frightened her. 
She went to the door. " Let me pass ! " she said. 

Fenton stood motionless, leaning his head against the 
door, with his eyes closed. She faced him a moment, 
looking at him intently. He seemed ineffably repulsive. 
" Coward ! " she cried. He opened his eyes at the sound ; 
for an instant they met hers; then a burning blush 



WATCH AND WABD. 209 

blazed out strangely on his dead complexion ; lie strode 
past her, dropped into a chair, and buried his face in his 
hands. " O Lordi " he cried. " I am an ass ! " 

Nora made it the work of a single moment to reach 
her own room and fling on her bonnet and shawl, of an- 
other to descend to the hall door. Once in the street 
she never stopped running till she had turned a corner 
and put the house out of sight. She weut £ar, hurried 
along by the ecstasy of relief and escape, and it was some 
time before she pei-ceived that this was but half the ques- 
tion, and that she was now quite without refuge. Thrust- 
ing her hand into her pocket to feel for her purse, she 
found that she had left it in her room. Stunned and 
sickened as she was already, it can hardly be said that 
the discovery added to her grief. She was beiag precip- 
itated toward a great decision ; sooner or later made little 
difPerenee. The thought of seeing Hubert Lawrence 
had now taken possession of her. Reserve, prudence, 
mistrust, had melted away ; she was mindful only of her 
trouble, of his nearness, and of the way he had once talked 
to her. His address she well remembered, and she 
neither paused nor faltered. To say even that she re- 
flected would be to speak amiss, for her longing and her 
haste were one. Between them both it was with a beat- 
ing heart that she reached his door. The servant ad- 
mitted her without visible surprise (for Nora wore, as 
she conceived, the air of some needy parishioner) and 
ushered her into his bachelor's parlor. As she crossed 
the threshold, she perceived with something both of re- 
gret and of relief, that he was not alone. He was sitting 
somewhat stiffly, with folded arms, facing the window^ 



210 WATCH AND WARD. 

near which, before an easel, stood a long-haired gentleman 
of foreign and artistic aspect, giving the finishing touches 
to a portrait in crayons. Hubert was in position for a 
likeness of his handsome face. When Nora appeared, his 
handsome face remained for a moment a blank ; the next 
it turned most eloquently pale. "Miss Lambert! "he 
cried. 

There was such a tremor in his voice that Nora felt 
that, for the moment, she must have self-possession for 
both. " I interrupt you," she said with extreme defer- 
ence. 

** We are just finishing ! " Hubert answered. " It is 
my portrait, you see. You must look at it." The artist 
made way for her before the easel, laid down his imple- 
ments, and took up his hat and gloves. She looked me- 
chanically at the picture, while Hubert accompanied him 
to the door, and they jtalked awhile about another sitting, 
and about a frame that was to be sent home. The por- 
trait was clever, but superficial ; better looking, at once, 
and worse looking than Hubert, — elegant, effeminate, 
unreal. An impulse of wonder passed through her mind 
that she should happen just then to find him engaged in 
this odd self-reproduction. It was a different Hubert 
that turned and faced her as the door closed behind 
his companion, the real, the familiar Hubert. He had 
gained time; but surprise, admiration, conjecture, a lively 
suggestion of dismay, were shining in his handsome 
eyes. Nora had dropped into the chair vacated by the 
artist ; and as she sat there with clasped hands, she felt 
the young man reading the riddle of her shabby dress 
and her excited face. For him, too, she was the real 



WATCH AND WARD. 211 

Nora. Dismay in Hubert's face began to elbow its com- 
panions. He ad?anced, pushed towards her the chair in 
which he had been posturing, and, as he seated himself, 
made a half-movement to offer his hand ; but before she 
could take it, he had begun to plaj with his watch-chain. 
" Nora," he asked, " what is it ? " 

What was it, indeed ? What was her errand, and in 
what words could it be told P An inexpressible weakness 
had taken possession of her, a sense of having reached 
the goal of her journey, the term of her strength. She 
dropped her eyes on her shabby skirt and passed her 
hand over it with a gesture of eloquent simplicity. " I 
have left Roger," she said. 

Hubert made no answer, but his silence seemed to fill 
the room. He sank back in liis chair, still looking at 
her with startled eyes. The fact intimidated him ; he 
was amazed and confused ; yet he felt he must say some- 
thing, and in his confusion he uttered a gross absurdity. 
" Ah," he said ; " with his consent ? " 

The sound of his voice was so grateful to her that, at 
first, she hardly heeded his words. " I am alone," she 
added, " I am free." It was after she had spoken, as 
she saw him, growing, to his own sense, infinitely small 
in the large confidence of her gaze, rise in a kind of 
agony of indecision and stand before her, stupidly staring, 
that she felt he had neither taken her hand, nor dropped 
at her feet, nor divinely guessed her trouble; that, in 
fact, his very silence was a summons to tell her story and 
justify herself. Her presence there was either a rapture or 
a shame. Nora felt as if she had taken a jump, and was 
learning in mid-air that the distance was tenfold what she 



212 WATCH AND WARD. 

had imagined. It is strange bow the binging-point of great 
emotions may rest on an instant of time. These instants, 
however, seem as ages, viewed from within ; and in such 
a reverberating moment Nora felt something that she had 
believed to be a passion melting from beneath her feet, 
crumbling and crashing into the gulf on whose edge she 
stood. But her shame at least should be brief. She 
rose and bridged this dizzy chasm with some tragic coun- 
terfeit of a smile. "I have come — I have come — ** 
She began and faltered. It wad a pity some great ac- 
tress had not been there to note upon the tablets of her 
art the light, all-eloquent tremor of tone with which she 
transposed her embarrassment into the petition, " Could 
you lend me a little monev ? " 

Hubert was simply afraid of her. All his falsity, all 
his levity, all his egotism and sophism, seemed to crowd 
upon him and accuse him in deafening chorus ; he seemed 
exposed and dishonored. It was with an immense sense 
of relief that he heard her ask this simple favor. Money ? 
Would money buy his release ? He took out his purse 
and grasped a roll of bills ; then suddenly he was over- 
whelmed by a sense of his cruelty. He flung the thing 
on the floor, and passed his hands over his face. " Nora, 
Nora," he cried, " say it outright ; you despise me 1 ** 

He had become, in the brief space of a moment, the 
man she once had loved; but if he was no longer the 
rose, he stood too near it to be wantonly bruised. Men 
and women alike need in some degree to respect those 
they have suffered to wrong them. She stooped and 
picked up the porte-monnaie, like a beggar-maid in a 
ballad. « A very little will do," she said. " In a day 
or two I hope to be independent." 



* WATCH AND WARD. 213 

'* Tell me at least wbat has liappened ! " he cried. 

She hesitated a luoinent. " Roger has asked me to be 
his wife." Hubert's head swam with the visiou of all 
that this simple statement embodied and implied. '* I 
refused/' Nora added, ** and, having refused, I was un- 
willing to live any longer on his — on his — '* Her 
speech at tlie last word melted into silence, and she 
seemed to fall a-musing. But in an instant she recovered 
herself. " I remember your once saying that you would 
have Uked to see me poor and homeless. Here I am ! 
You ought at least," she added with a laugh, " to pay for 
the exhibition I " 

Hubert abruptly drew out his watch. "I expect here 
at any moment," he said, " a young lady of whom you 
may have heard. She is to come and see my portrait. 
I am engaged to marry her. I was engaged to marry 
her five months ago. She is rich, pretty, charming. Say 
but a single word, that you don't despise me, that you 
forgive me, and I will give her up, now, here, forever, 
and be anything you will take me for, — your husband, 
your friend, your slave ! " To have been able to make 
this speech gave Hubert immense relief. He felt almost 
himself again. 

Nora fixed her eyes on him, with a kind of unfathomable 
gentleness. " You are engaged, you were engaged ? How 
strangely you talk about giving her up ! Give her my com- 
pliments ! " It seemed, however, that Nora was to have 
the chance of offering her compliments personally. The 
door was thrown open and admitted two ladies whom Nora 
vaguely remembered to have seen. In a moment she 
recognized them as the persons whom, on the evening she 



214 WATCH AND WARD. ' * 

bad gone to Lear Hubert preaeb, be had left ber, after 
the sermon, to conduct to tbeir carriage. The younger 
one was decidedly pretty, in spite of a nose a trifle too 
aquiline. A pair of imperious dark eyes, as bright as the 
diamond which glittered in each of her ears, and a ner- 
vous, capricious rapidity of motion and gesture, gave her 
an air of girlish bnesquerie, which was by no means without 
charm. Her mother's aspect, however, testified to its 
being as well to enjoy this charm at a distance. She was 
a stout, coarse-featured, good-natured woman, with a 
jaded, submissive expression, and seemed to proclaim by 
a certain ponderous docility, as she followed in ber 
daughter's wake, the subserviency of matter to mind. 
Both ladies were dressed to the uttermost limit of oppor- 
tunity. They came into the room staring frankly at 
Nora, and overlooking Hubert, with a gracious implica- 
tion of his being already one of the family. The situation 
was a trying one, but he faced it as he might. 

"This is Miss Lambert," he said gravely; and then 
with an effort to dissipate embarrassment by a jest, wav- 
ing his hand toward his portrait, " This is the Keverend 
Hubert Lawrence ! " 

The elder lady moved toward the picture, but the other 
came straight to Nora. " I have seen you before ! ** she 
cried defiantly, and with defiance in her pretty eyes. 
" And 1 have heard of you too ! Yes, you are certainly 
very handsome. But pray, what are you doing here ? " 

" My dear child ! '* said Hubert, imploringly, and with 
a burning side-glance at Nora. The world seemed to 
him certainly very cruel. 

" My dear Hubert," said the young lady, " what is she 



WATCH AND WARD. 215 

doiQg here ? I have a right to know. Have you come 
rmiaing after him even here? You are a wicked girl. 
You have done me a wrong. You have tried to turn him 
away from me. You kept him in Boston for weeks, 
when he ought to have been here ; when I was writing to 
him day after day to come. I heard all about it! I 
don't know what is the matter with you. I thought you 
were so very well off! You look very poor and unhappy, 
but I must say what I think I " 

"My own darling, be reasonable!" murmured her 
mother. "Come and look at this beautiful picture. 
There 's no deceit in that noble face ! " 

Nora smiled charitably. " Don't attack me," she said. 
" If I ever wronged you, 1 was quite unconscious of it, 
and I beg your pardon now." 

Nora," murmured Hubert, piteously, " spare me ! " 
Ah, does he call you Nora ? " cried the young lady. 
The harm 's done, madam 1 He will never be what he was. 
You have changed, Hubert ! " And she turned passion- 
ately upon her intended. ** You know you have ! You 
talk to me, but you think of her. And what is the 
meaning of this visit ? You are both strangely excited ; 
what have you been talking about ? " 

" Mr. Lawrence has been telling me about you," eaid 
Nora; "how pretty, how charming, how gentle you 
are!" 

" I am not gentle 1 " cried the other. " You are laugh- 
ing at me ! Was it to talk about my prettiness you came 
here ? Do you go about alone, this way ? I never heard 
of such a thing. You are shameless I do you know that ? 
But I am very glad of it ; because once you have done 






216 WATCH AND WARD. 

this for Lim, he will not care for you. That 's the way 
with men. And I ara not pretty either, xkot as you are ! 
You are pale and tired ; you have got a horrid dress and 
shawl, and yet you are beautiful ! Is that the way I 
must look to please you F " she demanded^ turning back 
to Hubert. 

Hubert, during this rancorous tirade, had stood look- 
ing as dark as thunder, and at this point he broke out 
fiercely, " Good God, Amy 1 hold your tongue, — I com- 
mand you.'* 

Nora, gathering her shawl together, gave Hubert a 
glance. " She loves you,** she said, softly. 

Amy stared a moment at this vehement adjuration ; 
theu she melted into a smile and turned in ecstasy to her 
mother. " O, did you hear that ? " she cried. " That 's 
how I like him. Please say it again ! " 

Nora left the room ; and, in spite of her gesture of 
earnest deprecation, Hubert followed her down stairs to 
the street. "Where are you going?" he asked in a 
whisper. " With whom are you staying ? " 

** I am alone," said Nora. 

" Alone in this great city ? Nora, I will do something 
for you." 

" Hubert," she said, " I never in my life needed help 
less than at this moment. Farewell." He fancied for 
an instant that she was going to offer him her hand, but 
she only motioned him to open the door. He did so, and 
she passed out. 

She stood there on the pavement, strangely, almost 
absurdly, free and light of spirit. She knew neither 
whither she should turn nor what she should do, yet the 



WATCH AND WARD. 217 

fears which bad haunted her for a whole day and night 
had vanished. The sky was blazing blue overhead ; the 
opposite side of the street was all in sun ; she hailed the 
joyous brightness of the day* with a kind of answering 
joy. She seemed to be in the secret of the universe. A 
nursery -maid came along, pushing a baby in a perambu- 
lator. She stooped and greeted the child, and talked 
pretty nonsense to it with a fervor which left the young 
woman staring. Nurse and child went their way, and 
Nora lingered, looking up and down the empty street. 
Suddenly a gentleman* turned into it from the cross-street 
above. He was walking fast ; he had his hat in his hand, 
and with his other hand he was passing his handkerchief 
over his forehead. As she stood and watched him draw 
near, down the bright vista of the street, there came upon 
her a singular and altogether nameless sensation, strangely 
similar to the one she had felt a couple of years before, 
when a physician had given her a dose of ether. The 
gentleman, she perceived, was Roger; but the short in- 
terval of space and time which separated them seemed to 
expand into a throbbing immensity and eternity. She 
seemed to be watching him for an age, and, as she did so, 
to be floating through the whole circle of emotion and the 
full realization of being. Yes^ she was in the secret of 
the universe, and the secret of the universe was, that 
Bx)ger was the only man in it who had a heart. Sud- 
denly she felt a palpable grasp. Roger stood before her, 
and had taken her hand. For a moment he said nothing ; 
but the touch of his hand spoke loud. They stood for 
an instant scanning the change in each otlier's faces. 
"Where are you going?" said Roger, at last, implor- 
ingly. 



\ 



218 WATCH AND WARD. 

Nora read silently in his haggard eyes the whole record 
of his suffering. It is a strange trutli that this seemed 
the most beautiful thing she had ever looked upon ; the 
sight of it was delicious. • It seemed to whisper louder 
and louder that secret about Roger's heart. 

Nora collected herself as solemnly as one on a death- 
bed making a will ; but Roger was still in miserable 
doubt and dread. " I have followed you," he said, "in 
spite of that request in your letter." 

** Have you got my letter ? " Nora asked. 

'* It was the only thing yon had" left me," he said, and 
drew it forth, creased and crumpled. 

She took it from him and thrust it into the pocket of 
her dress, never taking her eyes off his own. " Bon*t 
try and forget that I wrote it," she said. " I want you 
to see me bum it up, and to remember that." 

"What does it mean, Nora? " he asked, in hardly au- 
dible tones. 

" It means that I am a wiser girl to-day than tien. I 
know myself better, I know you better. Roger!" 
she cried, " it means everything ! " 

He passed her hand through his arm and held it there 
against his heart, while he stood looking hard at the 
pavement, as if to steady himself amid this great convul- 
sion of tilings. Then raising his head, " Come," he said ; 
"come!" 

But she detained him, laying her other hand on his 
arm. "No; you must understand first. If I am wiser 
now, I have learnt wisdom at my cost. I am not the girl 
yon proposed to on Sunday. I feel — I feel dishon- 
ored!" she said, uttering the word with a vehemence 
that stirred his soul to its depths. 



WATCH AND WARD, 219 

** My own poor cbild ! '* lie murmured, staring. 

"There is a young girl in tliat house," Nora went on, 
" who will tell you that I am shameless ! " 

" What house ? what young girl ? " 

** I don't know her name. Hubert is engaged to 
marry her." 

Eoger gave a glance at the house behind them, as if 
to fling defiance and oblivion upon all that it suggested 
and contained. Then turning to Nora with a smile of 
exquisite tenderness : " My dear Nora, what have we to 
do with Hubert's young girls ? " 

Roger, the reader will admit, was on a level with the 
occasion, — as with every other occasion that subsequently 
presented itself. 

Mrs. Keith and Mrs. Lawrence are very good friends. 
On being complimented on possessing the confidence of 
so charming a woman as Mrs. Lawrence, Mrs. Keith has 
been known to say, opening and shutting her fan, " The 
fact is, Nora is under a very peculiar obligation to me 1 " 




Cambridge : Eiectrotyped and Printed by Welch, Bigelow, & Ca 



."^ 



^h 



' ■ 



» 



3 2044 020 187 73 



The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 



Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-2413 



