Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



■iinHinii 



600060669X 




BODLEIAN LIBRARY 
OXFORD 






At Every Library. 



THE FIFTH EDITION 



OF 



PARIS HERSELF AGAIN. 



BY 



GEORGE AUGUSTUS SAL A, 

With 400 Illustrations by the first French artists, including 

many by the lamented Cham. 



2. Vols., demy, handsomely bound, 258. 






TlfeN<IJ»jpT<iN & CO., 5, Arundel Street, Strand, W.C. 



WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 



^ iaobel 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



BY 



GEORGE R. GISSING. 



VOL. I. ^v\OTHs^ 

JUL" 

REMINGTON AND CO., 

5, Arundel Street, Strand, W.C. 
1880. 

[/4U Rights Reserved.^ 



7 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE. 



Market Night 

The Rectory 

The Curate 

Home-Sick 

Professional Life 

CHAPTER VI. 
Childhood's Happy Hours 

CHAPTER VII. 



CHAPTER 1. 

• • • • • I 

CHAPTER 11. 
CHAPTER 111. 

• • • ' • • 

CHAPTER IV. 
CHAPTER V. 



Aspirations 

Progress 

Still Waters 

Changes 

A Double Life 

More Changes .. 

Emancipation 

Mind Growth ... 

CHAPTER XV. 
The Ex-Clergyman's Bequest 

CHAPTER XVI. 
The Studio 



CHAPTER VIIL 
I • • • • • 

CHAPTER IX. 

• • • • • • 

CHAPTER X. 

• • • • • • 

CHAPTER XI. 

• • • » • • 

CHAPTER XII. 

■ • • cat 

CHAPTER XIII. 
CHAPTER XIV. 



22 

... 46 

67 

9.3 
114 

••• *.35 

'59 
... 184 

207 

... 228 

257 
... 289 

306 

362 



f 



WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 



CHAPTER I. 



MAEKET-NTGHT. 



Walk with me, reader, into Whitecross Street. 
It is Saturday night, the market-night of the 
poor ; also the one evening in the week which 
the weary toilers of our great city can devote 
to ease and recreation in the sweet assurance 
of a morrow unenslaved. Let us see how 
they spend this " Truce of God ;" our oppor- 
tunities will be of the best in the district we 
are entering. 

As we suddenly turn northwards out of 
the dim and quiet regions of Barbican, we 
are at first confused by the glare of lights 
and the hubbub of cries. Pressing through 
an ever-moving crowd, we find ourselves in a 
long and narrow street, forming, from end to 
end, one busy market. Besides the ordinary 
shops, amongst which the conspicuous fronts 
of the butchers' and the grocers' predominate, 
the street is lined along either pavement with 
rows of stalls and booths, each illuminated 

VOL. I. B 



2 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

with flariDg naphtha-lamps, the flames of which 
shoot up fiercely at each stronger gust of 
wind, filling the air around with a sickly- 
odour, and throwing a weird light upon the 
multitudinous faces. Behind the lights stand 
men, women and children, each hallooing in 
every variety of intense key — from the shrillest 
conceivable piping to a thunderous roar, 
which well-nigh deafens one — the prices and 
the merits of their wares. The fronts of the 
houses, as we glance up towards the deep 
blackness overhead, have a decayed, filthy, 
often an evil, look ; and here and there, on 
either side, is a low, yawning archway, or a 
passage some four feet wide, leading presum- 
ably to human habitations. Let us press 
through the throng to the mouth of one of 
these and look in, as long as the reeking 
odour will permit us. Straining the eyes into 
horrible darkness, we behold a blind alley, 
the unspeakable abominations of which are 
dimly suggested by a gas-lamp flickering at 
the further end. Here and there through a 
window glimmers a reddish light, forcing one 
to believe that people actually do live here ; 
otherwise the alley is deserted, and the foot- 
step echoes as we tread cautiously up the 
narrow slum. If we look up, we perceive 
that strong beams are fixed across between 
ffche fronts of the houses — sure sign of the 
rottenness which everywhere prevails. Listen ! 
That was the shrill screaming of an infant 



MAEKET-MGHT. S 

which came from one of the nearest dens. 
Yes, children are born here, and men and 
women die. Let us devoutly hope that the 
<leaths exceed the births. 

Now back into the street, for already we 
have become the observed of a little group 
of evil-looking fellows gathered round the 
entrance. Let us press once more through 
the noisy crowd, and inspect the shops and 
stalls. Here is exposed for sale an astounding 
variety of goods. Loudest in their cries, 
and not the least successful in attracting 
customers, are the butchers, who, with knife 
and chopper in hand, stand bellowing in 
stentorian tones the virtues of their meat; 
now inviting purchasers with their — " Lovely, 
love-ly, 1-ove-ly ! Buy ! buy buy buy — buy ! " 
now turning to abuse each other with a foul- 
mouthed virulence surpassing description. 
See how the foolish artisan's wife, whose face 
bears the evident signs of want and whose 
limbs shiver under her insufficient rags, lays 
down a little heap of shillings in return for 
a lump, half gristle, half bone, of question- 
able meat — ignorant that with half the money 
she might buy four times the quantity of far 
more healthy and sustaining food. 

But now we come to luxuries. Here is a 
stall where lie oysters and whelks, ready 
stripped of their shells, offering an irresistible 
temptation to the miserable-looking wretches 
who stand around, sucking in the vinegared 



i 



4 WOBKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

and peppered dainties till their stomaclis are 
appeased, or their pockets empty. Next is a 
larger booth, where all manner of old linen, 
torn muslin, stained and faded ribbons, 
draggled trimming, and the like, is exposed 
for sale, piled up in foul and clammy heaps, 
which, as the slippery-tongued rogue, with a 
yard in his hand turns and tumbles it for the 
benefit of a circle of squalid and shivering^ 
women, sends forth a reek stronger than that 
from the basket of rotten cabbage on the 
next stall. How the poor wretches ogle the 
paltry rags, feverishly turn their money in 
their hands, discuss with each other in greedy 
whispers the cheapness or otherwise of the 
wares ! Then we have an immense pile of 
old iron, which to most would appear wholly 
useless ; but see how now and then a grimy- 
handed workman stops to rumniage among it, 
and maybe finds something of use to him in 
his labour. 

Here again, elevated on a cart, stands a 
vender of second-hand umbrellas, who, as he 
holds up the various articles of his stock and 
bangs them open under the street-lamps that 
purchasers may bear witness to their solidity, 
yells out a stream of talk amazing in its 
mixture of rude wit, coarse humour, and 
voluble impudence. " Here's a humbereller ! " 
he cries, " Look at this 'ere ; now do ! Fit 
for the Jewk o' York, the Jewk of Cork, or 
any other member of the no — bility. As fo 



MARKKT-NIGllT. 5 



my own grace, I hassure yer, I never uses 
any other ! Come, who says 'alf-a-crownd for 
this ? — =No ? — Why, then, two bob — one an'- 
a-tanner — a bob ! Gone, and damned cheap 
too ! " I'his man makes noise enough ; but 
here, closQ behind him, is an open shop-front 
with a mingled array of household utensils 
defying description, the price chalked in large 
figures on each, and on a stool stands a little 
lad, clashing incessantly with an enormous ^ 
hammer upon a tray as tall as himself^ and 
with his piercing young voice doing his 
utmost to attract hearers. Next we have a 
stall covered with cheap and trashy orna- 
ments, chipped glass vases of a hundred 
patterns, picture-frames, lamps, watch-chains, 
rings ; things such as may tempt a few of the 
hard-earned coppers out of a young wife's 
pocket, or induce the working lad to spend a 
shilling for the delight of some consumptive 
girl, with the result, perhaps, of leading her 
to seek in the brothel a relief from the slow 
death of the factory or the work-room. As 
we push along we find ourselves clung to 
by something or other, and, looking down, 
see a little girl, perhaps four years old, the 
Yery image of naked wretchedness, holding 
up, with shrill, pitiful appeals, a large piece of 
salt, for which she wants one halfpenny — no 
more, she assures us, than one half-penny. 
She clings persistently and will not be shaken 
off. Poor little thing ; most likely failure ta 



b WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

sell her salt will involve a brutal beatings 
when she returns to the foul nest which she 
calls home. We cannot carry the salt, but we 
give her a copper and she runs off, deHghted. 
Follow her, and we see with some surprise^ 
that she runs to a near eating-house, one of 
miBLnj we have observed. Behind the long^ 
counter stands a man and a woman, the 
former busy in frying flat fish over a huge 
fire, the latter engaged in dipping a ladle into 
a large vessel which steams profusely ; and 
in front of the counter stands a row of 
hungry-looking people, devouring eagerly the- 
flakes of fish and the greasy potatoes as fast 
as they come from the pan, whilst others are 
served by the woman to little basins of stewed 
eels from the steaming tureen. But the good 
people of Whitecross Street are thirsty as 
well as hungry, and there is no lack of gin- 
palaces to supply their needs. Open the door 
and look into one of these. Here a group are 
wrangling over a disputed toss or bet, here 
two are coming to blows, there are half-a- 
dozen young men and women, all half drunk, 
mauling each other with vile caresses ; and 
all the time, from the lips of the youngest 
and the oldest, foams forth such a torrent of 
inanity, abomination, and horrible blasphemy 
which bespeaks the very depth of human — 
aye, or of bestial — degradation. And notice 
how, between these centres and the alleys 
into which we have peered, shoeless children^ 



MARKET-NIGHT. 7 

slipshod and bareheaded women, tottering old 
men, are constantly coming and going with 
cans or jugs in their hands. Well, is it not 
Saturday night ? And how can the week's 
wages be better spent than in procuring a few 
hours* unconsciousness of the returning 
Monday. 

The crowd that constantly throngs from 
one end of the street to the other is very 
miscellaneous, comprehending alike the almost 
naked wretch who creeps along in the hope 
of being able to steal a mouthful of garbage, 
and the respectably clad artisan and his wife, 
seeing how best they can lay out their money 
for the ensuing week. The majority arc 
women, some carrying children in their arms, 
some laden with a basket full of purchases, 
most with no covering on their heads but the 
corner of a shawl. 

But look at the faces ! Here is a young 
mother with a child sucking at her bare 
breast, as she chaffers with a man over a 
pound of potatoes. Suddenly she turns 
away with reddened cheeks, shrinking before 
a vile jest which creates bursts of laughter in 
the by-standers. Pooh I She is evidently 
new in this quarter, perhaps come up of late 
from the country. Wait a year, and you will 
see her joining in the laugh at her own ex- 
pense, with as much gusto as that young 
woman behind her, whose features, under 
more favourable circumstances, might have 



8 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

had something of beauty, but starvation and 
dirt and exposure have coarsened the grain 
and made her teeth grin woefully between 
her thin lips. 

Or look at the woman on the other side, 
who is lauorhino: till she cries. Does not 
every line of her face bespeak the baseness of 
her nature ? Cannot one even guess at the 
vile trade by which she keeps her limbs 
covered with those layers of gross fat, whilst 
those around her are so pinched and thin ? 
Her cheeks haag flabbily, and her eyes twinkle 
with a vicious light. A deep scar marks her 
forehead, a memento of some recent drunken 
brawl. When she has laughed her fill, she 
turns to look after a child which is being 
dragged through the mud by her skirts, 
being scarcely yet able to walk, and, bidding 
it with a cuff and a curse not to leave loose 
of her, pushes on stoutly through the crowd. 

One could find matter for hour-long ob- 
servation in the infinite variety of vice and 
misery depicted in the faces around. It must 
be confessed that the majority do not seem 
unhappy; they jest with each other amid 
their squalor ; they have an evident pleasure 
in buying and selling ; they would be sur- 
prised if they knew you pitied them. And 
the very fact that they are unconscious of 
their degradation afflicts one with all the 
keener pifcy. We suffer them to become 
brutes in our midst, and inhabit dens which 



MAKKET-NIGHT. 9 

-clean animals would shun, to derive their 
joys from sources from which a cultivated 
mind shrinks as from a pestilential vapour. 
And can we console ourselves with the reflec- 
tion that they do not feel their misery ? 

Well, this is the Whitecross Street of to- 
day; but it is in this street rather more than 
twenty years aj^o that my story opens. There 
is not much difference between now and then, 
except that the appearance of the shops is 
perhaps improved, and the sanitary condition 
of the neighbourhood a trifle more attended 
to ; the description, on the whole, may re- 
main unaltered. 

It was about half-past ten on a Saturday 
night, towards the close of November. All 
day long it had been snowing, but the snow 
had melted as it reached the ground, form- 
ing endless puddles of mire, into which the 
unceasing tramp of the crowd had trodden 
all manner of refuse from the market- stalls, 
till the whole street reeked with foul odours. 
Amid the throng, about half-way up the 
street, we notice a figure presenting a strik- 
ing contrast to its surroundings. It is that 
of a gentleman, apparently some five and 
thirty years old, wearing the habit of a 
•clergyman, and who, judging from the 
^lauces he casts on either side as he with 
diflBculty makes his way through the noisome 
crowd, is very far from at home amid such 
flights and sounds. His face, which was 



]0 WORKEES IN THS DAWN. 

smooth-shaven, of very delicate complexion^, 
and handsome almost to effeminacy, was 
crossed one moment by a look of the pro- 
foundest commiseration, the next gave ex- 
pression of profound disgust and horror, as 
his eye fell on the objects and persons nearest 
him ; and not unfrequently he moved con- 
siderably out of his direct course in order to 
avoid some spectacle especially repulsive. As 
he proceeded along the street, he kept glanc- 
ing at the alleys and narrow lanes branching 
off on either hand, apparently in search of 
some particular locality. 

At length, having entered a small shop to 
make inquiries, he crossed the road, and after 
some hesitation, was turning into a narrow,, 
loathsome alley, which the light of a street 
lamp showed, bore the name of Adam and 
Eve Court, when a little girl, suddenly rush- 
ing out of the darkness, bumped unawares 
against him and fell to the ground, breaking^ 
to pieces a jug which she held in her hands. 
She did not begin to cry, but, instantly 
springing to her feet, proceeded to assail the 
cause of her accident with a stream of the 
foulest abuse, which would have been dread- 
ful enough on the lips of a grown-up man, 
but appeared unutterably so as coming from 
a child. 

" You've broke the jug, you have ! '^ 
screamed the little creature at last, having 
exhausted her epithets; "you've broke the 



MARKET-NIGHT. 1 1 

jugj you have ; and you'll 'ave to pay for it, 
you will. Come now, pay for the jug, will 
you, mister ?" 

" Good God I" exclaimed the gentleman, 
half to himself, " what a hell I have got 
into !'' 

Then, taking a shilling from his pocket, he 
gave it to the child. 

" Will that be enough ?" 

" Maybe it will." 

'* Stop ! Can you tell me which is No. 9 
in this yard ?" 

" And what dyer want with No. 9, eh ?'* 
asked the child, biting the coin as she spoke ; 
" I lives there." 

" Then you can show me the house, I sup- 
pose ?" 

'' Can if I chooses. What d'yer want with 
No. 9, eh ? " 

" Is there anyone named Golding living 
there ?" 

The child surveyed her questioner for a 
few moments with precociously evil eyes, then 
suddenly exclaimed — 

" Last house but two. You'll have to 
knock twice." After which she rushed out 
into the street and was lost in the crowd. 

The inquirer followed the direction indi- 
cated, and, picking his steps through the 
filth as carefully as the darkness allowed, 
with many an uneasy glance on either side 
and up at the houses, came at length in front 



12 WOUKERS IN TBB DAWN. 

of No. 9. He found the door standing open, 
but his eyes were unable to pierce a single 
foot into the dense blackness within. With 
a shudder, he groped for the knocker, and 
knocked loudly twice. 

He repeated the summons several times 
before any notice was taken. At length, how- 
aver, a window was thrown open above, and a 
shrill woman's voice cried out — 

'' What are you wantin' of ? Who is it? 

" Is there a Mr. Golding living here ?" 
asked the visitor, stepping back and endea- 
vouring to catch sight of the speaker. 

" There's one o' that name dyin' here, I'm 
thinkin'," returned a gruff voice, in a tono 
meant to be humorous. " What do you want 
with him, mister? Does he owe yer money? 
^Cos if he do, I'm thinkin' ye'U have to look 
out sharp after it." 

" Would you be so good as to show me to 
his room ?" cried the visitor. '' I particularly 
wish to see him." 

" Third floor back," screamed the female 
voice. " I s'pose yer don't want showin' the 
way up-stairs, do yer ?" 

The stranger entered the coal-black portal 
of the house, and, groping with his hands, 
made his way up-stairs till a door suddenly 
opened and a woman with a candle in her 
hand appeared. She seemed half undressed, 
her face, which was naturally hideous, was 
grimy with untold layers of dirt, and her 



MAKKET-NIGHT. 13 

whole appearance, lighted by the gleam from 
the tallow dip, was anything but reassuring. 
She started slightly when she perceived the 
elegant figure of the clergyman, and her 
manner at once became more respectful. 

** Mr. Golding's room's on the next floor^ 
sir. I doubt you'll find him in a bad way." 

*' Is he seriously ill ? " 

" Well, sir, my 'usband thinks him so bad 
as he's sent off our Jinny to the parish 
doctor ; but she ain't come back yet. We've 
done what we could for him, I'm sure sir; 
but, you see, being that he was so fond of 
liquor like, and being that he owes us near 
on a month's rent a'ready, sir, you see it 
warn't to be expected as we could do as much 
as we might a' done if he'd been a better 
lodger, you see, sir. If anythink 'appens to 
him, sir (which, and I'm sure, I 'ope as it 
won't), d'ye think, sir, he 'as any friends as 
wouldn't like to see poor people suffer by 
him, and as 'ud pay his back nnt, and — " 

It was impossible to say how long the 
woman would Lave gone on in this manner, 
for the appearance of the stranger seemed to 
work strongly upon her, and the fire of greed 
flashed from her green eyes ; but the latter 
cut her short in the midst of her speech and, 
with a hurried word or two, stepped quickly 
up to the next story. 

The door ^ stood slightly ajar, and feeble 
rays of light made their way on to the land- 



14 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

ing. As his knock met with no reply, the 
clergyman walked quietly in without invita- 
tion. The scene which met his eyes was one 
of indescribable squalor and misery. The 
room, which was some ten feet square and 
about six in height, contained absolutely 
no furniture save a rude three-legged table. 
The floor was rugged and sloped from one 
side down towards the other, as if the founda- 
tions of the house were gradually sinking ; 
the walls and ceiling in places showed great 
spots of moisture, and the small window, in 
which several panes had been broken and 
were replaced by brown paper, was sheltered 
by no blind or curtain, and gave admittance 
to a draught which swept round the room 
almost as keeoly as the wind in the open air. 
On the table burned a candle thrust into the 
broken neck of a bottle, and by its light the 
visitor was enabled dimly to discern the living 
occupants of the garret. In one corner, as 
far removed out of the draught of the 
window as possible, a few ragged clothes had 
been spread upon the floor, and on these lay 
the figure of a man in his trowsers and shirt 
only, his face hidden in the bundled-up coat 
which formed his pillow. By his side, his 
head resting on the man's arm, lay a little 
boy, apparently some eight years old. Both 
were sleeping ; the boy with the deep motion- 
less sleep of utter weariness, the man with 
occasional groans and tosses, and now and 



MAUKET-NIGHT* 15 

then a rattle in his throat, and struggling for 
breath, which, however, did not awake him. 

The clergyman took the candle in his hand 
and held it down so as to illumine the faces 
of the sleepers. That of the child was pale, 
meagre, sickly-looking, but withal pleasant 
in its natural outlines, particularly the mouth, 
which seemed to indicate a sweetness of 
•disposition seldom found in these nurslings 
of misery. His hair, though thick and some- 
what matted through neglect, was very fair, 
and fell naturally in rough curls about the 
forehead. It was necessary to move the man's 
head slightly in order to examine his face, 
and, as his eyes fell upon the features, the 
visitor drew back suddenly with a low excla- 
mation of mingled surprise, pity, and disgust. 
The face itself was not ill-formed, bearing in 
its lineaments an unmistakable resemblance 
to the child; but want, sickness and vice had 
wrougjht such effects upon it as almost en- 
tirely to destroy the agreeable character 
which the physiognomy must once have 
possessed. It was the face of a compara- 
tively young man ; certainly he could not be 
more than thirty. The cheeks were sunk in 
ghastly hollows, the nostrils were unnaturally 
distended by his hard breathing, the teeth 
were strongly clenched so that no breath 
could pass through the lips, the whole face 
was livid in hue. Death seemed to be even 
then overcoming him in his sleep. 



16 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

The visitor set down the candle hastily^ 
and, uttering a low exclamation of horror, 
moved as if to call assistance. But at once 
he appeared to alter his purpose, and, return- 
ing to the side of the sleeper, shook him by 
the shoulder, calling, as he did so — 

"Goldingl Golding!" 

The man showed no sign of returning to 
consciousness, but the disturbance awoke the 
child, who moved slowly to a sitting position, 
rubbed his eyes, and at length began to sob 
quietly, paying no attention whatever to the 
stranger. The latter persevered for a few 
minutes in his endeavours to arouse the sick 
man, but, finding his efforts vain, was on the 
point of hurrying from the room, when the 
door opened, and the woman who had ac- 
costed him on the stairs came in, holding 
in her hand a glass of something which 
smoked. 

'' The doctor's a dre'ful long while a 
comin', sir," she said, in a wheedling sort of 
tone. " I thought as 'ow a drop of some- 
think warm 'ud, may be, do the poor gentle- 
man good. Nevermind the hexpense, sir; 
we likes to do what little good we can in our 
small way, yer know." 

'' He is unconscious," replied the clergy- 
man, whose name we may at once say was 
Norman. '' I cannot awake him. Are you 
sure the messenger saw the doctor ? " 

*' Oh, quite sure, sir. Yer know tho 



MARKET-NIGHT. 17 

parisli doctor ain't over pertikler in comin* 
just when he's wanted. But he won't be 
long now. Maybe you'd take a drop yer- 
self, sir? No! Well, it don't suit every- 
body's stomach, certainly. So 'ere'syervery 
good 'ealth, sir, an th' 'ealth of the poor 
gentleman too." 

As she ceased she poured the warm liquor 
down her scraggy throat, leered hideously at 
the clergyman, and left the room. 

Mr. Norman be^an to pace backwards and 
forwards in the utmost impatience, rubbing 
his hands together, intertwisting his fingers, 
and showing every sign of extreme nervous- 
ness. In some ten minutes eleven o'clock 
sounded from the church hard by, and as the 
tones ceased a slight commotion was evident 
upon the stairs. At once footsteps began to 
ascend rapidly, and Mr. Norman, with a sigh 
of relief, humed to the door just in time to 
meet upon the threshold a young, earnest- 
looking man, whom the clergyman greeted 
with instinctive confidence. The doctor ex- 
amined Golding for a few minutes in silence, 
then turned away from him with a slight 
shrug of the shoulders. 

" Too late," he said, looking at the clergy- 
man, "much too late. He won't last an 
hour." 

"I feared it." 

" Drink, sir, drink, and a dozen other ail- 
ments induced by it. I should only be wast- 

VOL. I. 



\ 



18 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

ing my time here at present, but I will look 
in about ten to-morrow." 

** You can't prescribe anything ? " 

" Quite useless," replied the doctor, de- 
cisively. "You take a special interest in 
him ? " 

"He was an old college friend of mine, 
poor fellow. It is more than eight years since 
I saw him, but I could not have believed such 
a change possible." 

The doctor made a few sympathetic re- 
marks, bowed, and ran down stairs as quickly 
as he had come up. Mr. Norman tried once 
more to awaken the dying man to conscious- 
ness, but with no immediate result. So he 
turned his attention to the child, who still 
sat in the same place sobbing quietly. 

'' Is that your father ? " he asked the boy, 
scanninof the ha(}:o:ard features of his face 
with nervous glances. 

The child sobbed out an aflBrmative reply, 
but no more. At this moment the sick man 
stirred slightly, and Mr. Norman saw his 
eyes slowly open. 

*' Golding 1 " ho exclaimed, kneeling down 
by his side. '' Do you see me ? Do you know 
me?" 

For some minutes no sign of conscious- 
ness manifested itself; but then the man 
made obvious efforts to speak. His face 
was dreadfully distorted in the struggle for 
breath, bub no sound escaped him save a 



MARKET-NIGHT. 19 

hollow rattle in his throat. The clergyman 
bent nearer to him in the hope of hearing a 
word, and, as he did so, Grolding suddenly 
grasped him by the arm, and with his head 
and eyes made convulsive motions in the 
direction of the child. For a moment the 
grasp of his hands on Mr. Norman's arm was 
fearful in its violence, then it all at once re- 
laxed, the perpetual rattle ceased, the eyes 
became fixed in a steady stare at the ceiling. 

The candle had burnt to the socket, and 
the smoke rising from it in a narrow white 
column filled the room with its smell. The 
room was quite dark save for a faint gleam 
which came from a bedroom window on the 
opposite side of the court. In the house was 
absolute silence. The street was too far off 
for any sound from such buyers and sellers 
as might still linger there to be heard in the 
recesses of Adam and Eve Court. As the 
clergyman stood for a few moments, irresolute 
in the dark, he heard the voice of a woman 
screaming from a window opposite, and the 
laugh of a drunken man reeling into a house 
hard by. At length he rose to his feet and 
left the room. 

On the first landing the woman again met 
him with a candle in her hand. 

" Has anythink 'appened, sir ? " she asked. 

" He is dead," replied Mr. Norman. 

" Bh ! poor fellow I You don't 'appen to 
know, sir, if he's got any friends besides 



20 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

yerself , sir ? Maybe there's somebody, sir^ 
as mightn't like him to die in this way sir, an* 
him owin' — " 

" I will myself see to all that," in* 
terrupted the clergyman, turning away from 
the harpy's hideous face in loathing. " I 
wanted to tell you that I am going to take 
away his child with me. I will return in the 
morning.'* 

" Oh, very well, sir. I'm sure it's good of 
you to take thought of the child. I've took 
a great deal o' care of him, sir, an' he's been 
a good bit of expense to me one way an' 
another. You seethegen'Iemanz^?owZc?drink,^ 



an — 



The clergyman cut short the old hag's 
protestations by once more ascending to the 
garret, having just taken the candle from her 
hand. He bent down to the boy, and said, 
in a low voice — 

" Come with me, my poor child. Come 
quietly. You mustn't wake your father, for 
he is very poorly." 

The child shook off the speaker's hands, 
and took hold of the arm of the corpse as if to 
prevent himself from being removed by force. 

'' Why should I go with you ?" exclaimed 
the child, impulsively. " I'm going to stay 
with father, I am. I'll wait till he wakes. 
1 don't know you at all, do I ?" 

Mr. Norman reflected for a moment, then 
spoke in a kind, low voice — 



MAEKBT-NIGHT. 21 

" Your father is dead, my poor child. He 
will never wake." 

The boy stared with terror in the speaker s 
face, then sprang to the dead man's side, and 
grasped the face in his hands. He seemed to 
understand that the stranger had told him 
the truth. He fell upon his face on the floor, 
sobbing as if his heart would break, and 
between his sobs, crying — 

** Father, father 1 " 

It was vain to endeavour to take him 
away, and Mr. Norman was ultimately 
obliged to leave him alone in the garret 
with the corpse. Making his way down the 
pitch-black, creaking staircase, he passed 
into the open air. It was with a sigh of 
relief that he looked upwards, and in the 
narrow space, between tho tops of the houses, 
saw a few stars shining, for it bad now 
ceased snowing and the frost had began to dry 
the ground. There wore still people moving 
about Whitecross-street when ho entered it, 
but the noise of the market had ceased, and 
all the lights were extinguished. Not without 
apprehensive glances at some of the figures 
which slouched by him in the darkness, Mr. 
Norman hurried along over the half-formed 
ice, and the still reeking remnants from the 
stalls, till at length he reached a more open 
neighbourhood. Here he soon found an op- 
portunity of taking a cab, and before long 
reached his hotel in Oxford-street. 



CHAPTER IL 



THE KECTOBT. 



Edwaed Norman had the good fortune, at a 
comparatively early age, to find himself com- 
fortably established as incumbent of the 
parish of Bloomford, which comprised some 
five hundred inhabitants in all, and was de- 
lightfully situated in one of the pleasantest 
of the southern counties. The duties result- 
ing from his position were, as may be imagined, 
not very arduous, and the compensation, from 
a purely sordid point of view — that treasure 
upon earth which the clergy doubtless prize 
merely as a type of the heavenly treasure 
which will one day be theirs — was far from 
doing discredit to those " pious ancestors " 
of the village, whose liberality, as in all such 
cases, it was pleasantly understood to re- 
present. It would, however, have been a 
heart steeped to the very root in the poison 
of Democracy, Communism, and kindred evils 
which could have grudged Edward Norman 
his charming little rectory and the thousand a 
year which enabled him to keep it in repair, 
for, in very truth, it would have been difficult 
to find a clergyman of a sweeter disposition, 
a kindlier heart, a sunnier intellect than his. 



THE RECTORy. 23 

His very appearance enforced one to conceive 
towards him a mingled sentiment of affection 
and compassion ; for though his eye was ever 
bright, his lofty forehead unwrinkled, his 
cheek ever answering with a warm flush to 
the affectionate impulses of his heart, yet the 
first glance showed you that the man was an 
invalid, that his days were in all probability 
numbered. His malady was consumption; 
it had made its first decided appearance when 
he came of age, and now that he was almost 
thirty-five he could entertain no hope of 
its relaxing the hold it had gained upon his 
constitution. 

The rectory of Bloomford was situated on 
a gently sloping hill-side, about a quarter of a 
mile above the church. It was a picturesque 
old building, with a roof of red tiles and a 
multiplicity of chimneys and gables, with 
small latticed windows in the upper story, 
broad eaves beneath which endless birds made 
their nests, and, over all, a forest of ivy, so 
old that the stems were like the trunks of 
trees. Before the house lay a carefully- 
tended flower garden, behind it a kitchen 
garden and an orchard, all around which ran 
a crumbling brick wall, some six feet high, 
on the outside thickly overgrown with the 
abounding ivy, within kept clear for the 
training of peach and plum trees. Even 
now, at the end of November, it was by no 
means a dreary place, for its smallness always 



24 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

gave it a compact and comfortable air ; while 
in the autumn evenings all the front windows 
would glow with the warm reflection of the 
setting sun, and the smoke from the high 
chimnies curl up in many-hued shapes which 
seemed to bespeak the home-like comfort 
within. As you viewed the house from the 
front, there was, indeed, an object which 
gave it an air of individuality as distinguished 
from any other pleasantly situated country 
house; this was a somewhat newly-built 
tower, mainly of glass, which constituted a 
modest observatory, containing a large tele- 
scope, which was one of the chief delights of 
the clergyman's existence. This tower he 
had had built immediately after his entering 
upon the living, not without considerable 
scandal in the neighbourhood, where Mr. 
Norman was in consequence at first regarded 
as a species of Dr. Faustus, with whom it 
might possibly be dangerous, notwithstanding 
the apparent soundness of his doctrine, to 
hold much connection. It had indeed been 
formally decided at a meeting of the Bloom- 
ford Ladies' Sewing Club : " That this club 
considers the study of astronomy to be a 
sinful prying into the mysteries of the 
Almighty, and consequently a wilful tempting 
of His displeasure ; that this club is surprised 
and grieved that a clergyman of the Church 
of England should set such an example to 
the weaklings of his flock ; and that this club 



THE EECTORY. 25 

clo, in consequence, prepare a memorial on 
this subject, to be duly presented to the Rev. 
Mr. Norman on the earliest fitting opportu- 
nity." This resolution was written out, with 
the due emphasis, by the secretary of the 
<5lub, but the memorial was never presented, 
owing, I believe, to the fact that the personal 
amiability of the reverend gentleman in a 
very short time succeeded in utterly dis- 
arming the suspicions of the fair inquisitors. 
At that time a large majority of the club 
were unmarried ladies, and it may not un- 
reasonably be concluded that the fact of Mr. 
Norman being then a bachelor of twenty- 
four had an appreciable influence in weaken- 
ing their zeal for the preservation of the 
Creator's privacy. This had been some ten 
years since, and at present the only memorial 
of those early prejudices existed in tlie person 
of a poor old woman of the villnge, who, hav- 
ing gone harmlessly crazy just at the time 
when the rector's presuinption had been the 
great topic of conversation, still never failed 
to pass him without asking, with a respectful 
curtesy — 

" What's the latest news from heaven, my 
lord ?" 

The respectable subscribers to our circu- 
lating libraries would not owe me much 
thanks were ] to describe in detail the oft- 
treated history of a clergyman's search among 
his fair parishioners for a suitable partner of 



26 WORKEES IN THE DAWN. 

liis cares, or, perhaps I should say, the hot 
competition among the latter for the posses- 
sion of the dearly-coveted honour, the position 
of a parson's wife. Without unnecessary 
amplitude of description, therefore, I shall 
content myself with saying that, before 
Edward Norman had been a year in his cure, 
the lot had been drawn, and the happy maid 
had received her prize ; nor could the most 
envious assert that in choosing Helen Burton 
for his bride, the clergyman had laid himself 
open to imputations on his taste or his 
generosity. Helen had long been, undis- 
putedly, the village beauty, but so humble 
Avas her social position that not one of the 
damsels who boasted of their place in the 
aristocracy of the district had for a moment 
dreamed of her as a rival. She was nothing 
more than the daughter of the principal tailor 
in Bloomford, but her father was a man of 
the strictest integrity, even of some intel- 
lectual pretensions, and universally respected 
by all who were so unfortunate as to ba 
tainted with the modern heresy that money 
does 7iot make the man. Helen had, thanks 
to this worthy man's care, received an edu- 
cation which would compare very favourably 
indeed even with that possessed by tho 
daughters of Sir Bedford Lamb, one of tha 
members for the county, whose seat was only 
some two miles distant from Bloomford. It 
was indeed then to the astonishment of all^ 



THE RECTORY. 27 

but to the scandalisation — and that affected 
— of only the few, that Helen Burton had 
become Mrs. Norman. 

Edward Norman loved his wife devotedly, 
passionately. Upon her he lavished all the 
treasures of his dreamy, sentimental, poetical 
temperament. From his first sight of her 
she had become the goddess of his thought, 
the centre of every hope and longing which 
shed its fragrance upon his calm, contempla- 
tive life ; and when at length these aspira- 
tions were fulfilled, and she had become the 
goddess of his hearth, the man felt as if life 
had nothing more to give him. But from the 
very exuberance of its bounty towards him 
did life become more than ever dear, and this 
in face of the fact that it was gradually, 
hopelessly slipping away from him. But 
sometimes again this very hopelessness bred 
within him a refinement of delight to which 
a healthier man could scarcely have attained. 
As, during the early months of their mar- 
riage, he often sat through the long summer 
evenings in the quietness of his study, hold- 
ing Helen's hand within his Qwn, and both 
together gazing westwards on the melting 
glories of the sunset, he felt that to gradu- 
ally sink into his grave cared for at every 
moment by this angel whom Fate had sent to 
bless him, and drink in the ever-deepening 
fervour of her love as she felt him passing 
from her side, to hold, when all was over^ 



28 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

for ever a sacred place in so pure a mind — 
at times lie felt that these were delights far 
superior to the possession of the most robust 
health and hopes of the longest life. To be 
sure there was a tinge of refined selfishness 
in this ; but that was a part of his nature. 
And what purest affection is without it ? 

But in these hopes he had deceived him- 
self. Before his bliss had lasted for a year 
it seemed about to be crowned by the birth 
of a child. The child — a girl — was indeed 
born, but at the expense of its mother's 
life. 

Edward Norman's grief was sacred even 
to the impertinence of village gossip. When, 
a few weeks after, a beer-muddled rustic 
happened to stray late at night in the neigh- 
bourhood of the churchyard, and next morn- 
ing spread the report among his fellow- 
yokels that he had seen a ghost by the new 
grave stretching up its arms in the moon- 
light, his story did not attract much comment, 
for the hearts of the humblest, which, after 
all, are human, whispered that the agony of 
a husband over a young wife's tomb was not 
a subject for trivial chatter. 

But when the period of more or less 
lachrymose sympathy had waned with the 
rector's first year of bereavement, other 
thoughts began once more to spring in the 
young female mind of Bloomford. If Mr. 
Norman had been interesting before, how 



THE EEOTOEY. 29 

infinitely more so had he now become. The 
movement for a fresh attack upon his sensi- 
bilities took first of all the ominous form of 
sympathy for bis child, poor little Helen. 
What a shocking thing it was that the little 
darling — such an absolute little angel — had 
no mother to care for it. How was it pos- 
sible that it should be sufficiently tended by 
the hired nurse-girl, even though overseered 
by the rector's housekeeper, Mrs. Cope, a 
worthy old lady who had watched Edward 
Norman's own cradle, and, shortly after his 
wife's death, had gladly complied with his 
written request that she would undertake 
the guidance of his household ? Of course, 
such a state of affairs was absolutely con- 
trary to the nature of things — it might even 
be said to the divine law ; for it should be 
noted that these ladies, who had once been 
shocked at the clergyman's astronomical 
studies, were anything but backward in in- 
terpreting the thoughts and the wishes of 
Providence when it suited them to do so. 
But then arose the question among the more 
serious as to whether a clergyman could, 
consistently with his sacred office, take unto 
himself a second fleshly comforter. The 
younger maidens firmly maintained that there 
was nothing shocking in such a course, and 
to such an extent did their views preponde- 
rate that when, by chance, an inoffensive 
damsel of sixty summers, whose turn it was 



50 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

to read aloud for an evening to the Bloom- 
ford Ladies' Mutual Improvement Society 
(a recent development of the Sewing-Club be- 
fore-mentioned) came, in the " Vicar of Wake- 
field," to those unfortunate sentiments of Dr. 
Primrose on the very question at issue, she 
was forthwith stopped by a chorus of dis- 
sentients, and the book was no more read 
aloud in the Society ; it being whispered by 
one or two members, that, after all. Gold- 
smith did not display that delicacy of concep- 
tion necessary in one whose works are to be 
fitted for mutual improvement. 

Whether Mr. Norman was aware of this 
and the like matters it would not be easy to 
say ; in all probability not. His life became 
every day more solitary and secluded; to such* 
an extent, indeed, as to give rise to the re- 
monstrances of his more sensible friends. As 
his wont was, he listened with amiability to 
all who found an opportunity of addressing 
him, but without the slightest effect upon his 
conduct. 

By nature little disposed to social life, he 
now lived more and more in the company of 
his books and his thoughts. His grief had, 
of course, calmed as time wore on; had 
become, indeed, somewhat of a quiet plea- 
sure, finding its expression in long hours of 
reverie wherein his thoughts were busiest 
with multiplying idealisations of his dead 
wife, and of the bliss he had enjoyed with 



THE RECTORY. 31 

her ; or, at other times, in looking forward to 
the day when httle Helen would revive her 
mother's loveliness in the full blusli of woman- 
hood, and wondering whether ho would live 
to see it. 

Under such circumstances, he was rather 
^lad to avail himself of the popular sympathy 
in order to provide a pretext for his much-loved 
retirement. His health was another, and a 
real cause for abstinence from too active exer- 
tions. His malady progressed, very slowly 
but perceptibly, and, some five years after 
his wife's death, a special illness rendered it 
absolutely necessary that he should have the 
benefit of a change of air. He accordingly 
obtained leave of absence from his duties, 
and passed rather more than a month in the 
south of France. It was immediately after 
his return to Bloomford that a letter from 
Golding came to his hand, resulting in his 
sudden visit to London, the circumstances 
of which have been detailed in the last 
chapter. 

Three days after this, Edward Norman 
was sitting at breakfast in the little morning- 
room which looked northwards, upon what 
was in summer the pleasantest part of the 
garden — a fair lawn, bordered with flower- 
beds, and enclosed with thick growths of 
laburnum. The room itself was light and 
cheerful, the choice and arrangement of its 
ornaments remaining still a sacred memorial 




32 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

of the taste of its former mistress. Every- 
thing bespoke the utmost elegance and 
refinement in him who now alone used the 
room, impressing the beholder with ideas 
fully borne out by the appearance of the 
clergyman himself. 

He was sitting in an arm-chair by the fire- 
side, a small low table bearing the tray which 
held his simple breakfast. He wore a hand- 
some dressing-gown closely folded around 
him, from beneath the bottom of which ap- 
peared a pair of spotless woollen- slippers. A 
newspaper lay on the table, which had 
apparently not yet been opened, but an ex- 
quisite little copy of Horace formed his com- 
panion at breakfast instead, which he perused 
with a languid pleasure through his gold- 
rimmed eye-glasses. 

It did not, however, seem to engross his 
attention, for his eyes frequently wandered 
to the windows and looked out upon the rays 
of faint sunlight which, struggling through 
ominous clouds, fell nthwart the lawn and 
upon the leafless laburnums. At one of these 
glances his face suddenly assumed a look of 
keener interest. This was caused by the 
sight of two children, a little girl, perhaps 
eight years old, with a face of delicate pretti- 
ness, and dressed in a handsome little winter 
costume which became her wonderfully, and 
by her side a boy, in appearance much older, 
though in reality about the same age. The 



THE BEOTORT. 33 

clothing had undergone a reformation ; but 
the handsome, pale, attenuated features, and 
the curling yellow hair were evidently those* 
of poor Gelding's child. He seemed to fol- 
low his graceful little companion with reluct- 
ance, scarcely ever raising his eyes to look at 
the objects around him, but keeping them 
bent upon the grass. 

The expression on his face was sorrowful 
in the extreme ; tears seemed momentarily 
about to start from his eyes. The remarks 
which the little girl addressed to him he 
seemed not to understand ; at all events, he 
scarcely attempted to answer them. The 
two were not quite alone, but were followed 
at the distance of a few yards by a cheerful- 
looking middle-aged woman, who knitted as 
she walked, catsting each moment curious 
glances at the children in front of her. This 
was Mrs. Cope, the rector's worthy house- 
keeper. In her cheeks still lived much of 
the bloom which had made her not a little 
admired, when, as a country maiden of six- 
teen, she had been called to act as handmaid 
of Edward Normau himself, then aged one 
year. 

Mrs. Cope was now a widow, and among 
the most active of the plotters against Mr» 
Norman's peace in Bloomford there were not 
a few who looked with a jealous eye upon this 
lady. If the rector had begun by marrying a 
tailor's daughter, who could guarantee that 

VOL. I. D 



34 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

he would not once more bid defiance to the 
world bj taking to wife his housekeeper? 
The more prudish even whispered that it 
really was not very delicate in Mr. Norman 
to permit the residence in his ladyless house 
of a ** female" of Mrs. Cope's years and 
appearance. 

The rector s eyes were still fixed upon the 
figures on the lawn, when a sudden ring at 
the door-bell announced the arrival of a 
visitor. A moment after a servant tapped at 
the door, and proclaimed — 

" Mr. Whiffle." 

This gentleman was no other than the 
curate of the parish. His appearance and 
character appear to me to merit a few lines of 
description. In stature he stood some five 
feet, no more, and his head looked very much 
too large for this diminutive body. Probably 
this efPect was increased by the peculiarities 
of his hair, which stood almost on end in 
large, coarse, reddish clusters over the top of 
his head; the pressure of a hat seemed to 
have not the slightest efPect upon its stubborn 
elasticity. He wore extremely stiff whiskers, 
also red in hue, but no moustache. The 
habitual expression of his face was irresistibly 
comic; the eyes being very large and con- 
stantly moving in the drollest manner, whilst 
his nose, slightly celestial in tendency, and 
the peculiar conformation of his mouth and 
chin gave his countenance something of a 



THE EECTORY. 35 

Hibernian cast, though the man was true- 
bom English. His constant attitude was 
very upright, as if to make the most of his 
inches, with the fore-finger of either hand 
inserted in his waistcoat pockets, and with 
his toes, upon which he regularly rose as he 
Bpoke, decidedly turned in towards each 
other. Such was the outward and visible 
appearance of Mr. Orlando WhiflBe. Of his 
character I shall not say much at present, 
leaving it for the divination of the acute 
reader. I may, however, remark that the 
man was a living satire upon the Church of 
which he was a servant, an admirable cari- 
cature, f iar excelling anything that a professed 
ridiculer of ecclesiasticism could possibly 
have conceived. His age was about forty, 
and he had officiated as curate in Bloomford 
since the arrival of Mr. Norman. At that 
time, some ten years ago, he already re- 
joiced in a family of three sons and two 
daughters, and the circle of his patriapotestas 
had since been widened by the arrival of 
three more daughters. And yet Mr. Whiffle 
was a light-hearted man. 

He advanced into the room with his usual 
bow, which, like everything he did, was very 
much exaggerated and extremely ridiculous, 
then stepped briskly up to a low arm-chair 
over against that occupied by the rector, 
and dropped into it with quite a startling 
suddenness. 



36 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" G-ood-morning, Mr. Whiffle," said the 
rector, not taking the trouble to rise. " Quite 
a pleasant morning." 

" Remarkably so, sir. The singing of the 
sparrows quite charmed me as I came along." 

" Of the sparrows, Mr. Whiffle ? " 

** Possibly they may have been another 
species of bird, sir. I have never given much 
attention to natural history. The Church 
does not encourage it." 

He spoke in a sprightly, jerky manner,, 
twirling his soft, clerical hat in his hand, and 
constantly shuffling uneasily on his chair. 

"Did you come across the lawn?" asked 
the rector, smiling slightly. 

** I did, sir. And I observed there a young^ 
gentleman of whose existence here I was not 
previously aware. May I ask who ? " 

" He is the child of an old friend of mine 
— a man in a humble position in life — who 
Jbas just died and left, as far as he was aware 
of, no relatives. I have undertaken to take 
care of the boy." 

" Ah ! Interesting, very interesting ! You 
will send him to school, I presume ? He is 
hardly old enough for a boarding-school yet." 

** Nor advanced enough. The poor child has 
received absolutely no education of any kind." 

** Ah I Interesting beyond expression. 

Absolutely virgin soil for the ploughshare of 

. instruction ; absolutely unturned ground for 

the seed of fundamental ideas ! I think I 



\ 



THE RECTORY. 37 

liave already hinted to you, sir, that I am 
preparing a pamphlet on the subject of 
^ Fundamental Ideas,' in which I prove that 
there are three such ideas, and three only, 
which should never fail to be first of all 
instilled into the youthful mind. The first 
of these is the Inviolability of the Church as 
by Law Established ; the second is the Immu- 
tability of the Poor Laws ; the third is the 
Condemnability of Dissent. These I am 
wont, in my facetious way, to term my three 
* Abilities,' — ha, ha, ha I I fancy I shall 
prove to the satisfaction of all readers that 
an education grounded upon the basework of 
these three ideas would be the very ideal of 
what education should be." 

" I am hardly at one with you as to your 
second," said Mr. Norman, ''and I imagine 
that if you had accompanied me in a walk I 
took the other day in London, you would have 
replaced it by some more fitting one — say the 
Immutability of Human Wretchedness. Did 
you ever happen to walk through Whitecross 
Street when you lived in London, Mr. 
Whiffle ? " 

" Whitecross Street, my dear sir ? I had 
the happiness of officiating for a brief period 
in the very parish which includes it." 

** Indeed ? Then I need not describe it to 
you. Good God I I shall be haunted to my 
dying day with the scenes I beheld there last 
Saturday night." 



38 WORKEES IN THE DAWN. 

" Very bad locality, sir; remarkably bad. 
Indeed, I may say it surpasses my limited 
comprehension that such localities should be 
permitted to exist in a land enjoying the in- 
estimable blessing of a Holy Catholic and 
Apostolic Church. Upon my word, sir, that 
is one of the things that one should preacb a 
crusade against ! Yes, if I had the happiness 
of holding a living in London, I would com- 
mence to preach a crusade against Whitecross 
Street to-morrow — I mean next Sunday." 

Mr. Whiffle, according to his habit, rose to 
his feet in the excitement of speaking, crushed 
his hat emphatically upon the table, thrust 
his fingers deep into his waistcoat pockets, 
and swayed backwards and forwards on his 
toes. As he concluded, he plumped down 
again into his easy chair. 

" But I imagine, Mr. Whiffle, that the first 
step towards abolishing such horrors would 
consist of a judicious alteration in those Poor 
Laws which you pledge yourself to maintain." 

Mr. Norman had scarcely a serious air 
when conversing with his curate. You could 
see that he took a pleasure in bringing out 
the man's eccentricities and internally making 
merry over them. 

" No such thing, sir ! " exclaimed Mr. 
Whiffle, " that is, I mean, if you permit me 
to urge my opinion against that of my rector. 
I assure you, sir, I have given thought to the 
subject. It is not the Poor Laws at fault ;. 



THE RECTORY. 39 

it is inherent impracticability in the nature of 
the lower classes which renders these Laws 
comparatively inoperative. Depend upon it, 
sir, the spread of Dissent among these off- 
scourings of the earth, it I may so express 
myself, is the origin and root of the evil. 
They lack respect for the Established Church, 
sir.'' 

" Possibly there may be something in what 
you say, Mr. Whiffle." 

" I have in my head, sir, the details of a 
pamphlet on the subject of Dissent. I will 
venture to submit it to you in a short time. 
If there is one thing against which the Church 
should at once preach a crusade, it is that 
canker in the blossom of contemporary 
society, if I may so express myself — Dissent !'* 

" It was horrible, horrible ! " said the 
rector, speaking more to himself than to Mr. 
Whiffle. " The thought oftenest in my mind 
whilst in that hideous scene was : How can 
we wonder that men doubt the existence of 
God ? " 

*• Precisely the same thought has often 
occurred to myself. Really, one ought to 
carry about with one small selected volumes 
of religious evidences, especially for sucli 



occasions." 



There was silence for some minutes, during 
which Mr. Whiffle whistled a Te Deum in a 
very low tone. Mr. ^'orman then suddenly 
seemed to rouse himself. 



40 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

** But I have been wandering/* he said. 
** My real reason for begging you to look in 
this morning was that 1 might consult you 
on the subject of Arthur's education. The 
child's name is Arthur Golding. Do you 
think your leisure would permit of your 
giving the child two or three hours' teacliing 
a day?" 

*'My dear sir!" exclaimed Mr. Whiffle, 
starting to his feet, " I should be overjoyed 
to be entrusted with such a duty ! It would 
be the proudest day for me since that ever- 
memorable one upon which I entered the 
Church ! " 

" I am glad it so entirely chimes with your 
inclinations. As 1 said, the poor lad is 
terribly backward. He is, moreover, quite 
unusually sensitive for a child. I fancy that 
in any case we must wait some little time 
before attempting to do anything with him. 
1 never saw a child suffer so as he has done 
in consequence of his father's death. Suppose 
I walk over to you this evening, if it continues 
fine, and bring Arthur with me ? The sight 
of your children might cheer him." 

*' Precisely, precisely ! " exclaimed Orlando, 
who grew more cheery than ever when re- 
minded of his family — for did not a tutorship 
imply a stipend ? " Let us say seven o'clock, 
my dear sir. At that hour we shall all be 
gathered round the hearth in domestic peace, 
1 hope." 



TFIR RECTORY. 41 

** So be it." 

Very shortly after this Mr. Whiffle rose- 
and took his leave. He was, it should be 
noticed, a man by no means devoid of infor- 
mation, which, when he kept clear of clerical 
matters, he could make tolerable use of. He 
i?ras a fair classical scholar, but especially 
;aa excellent arithmetician, so that Edward 
Norman had not acted with such indiscretion 
as might at first sight appear in proposing to 
entrust to him such an important matter as a 
child's education. 

The rector had not seen fit, however, to 
make Mr. Whiffle his confidant in the exact 
story of Arthur Golding's antecedents. 
Nothing would be gained by doing so ; on 
the contrary Orlando's active tongue would 
scarcely fail to circulate among the 
parishioners stories which were far better 
kept secret. But that afternoon Mr. Norman, 
in writing a letter to the only intimate friend 
he possessed, by name Gilbert Gresham, an 
artist who was just then travelling in Italy, 
^ave a full account of the evening he had 
passed in Whitecross Street. 

It was only in these letters to his friend 
that Edward Norman gave utterance to his 
real feelings. In miscellaneous company he 
was always under obvious restraints ; with 
such men as his curate and sundry of the 
neighbouring clergy who occasionally visited 
iim he was at ease, often gravely satirical. 



42 WORKERS -IN THE DAWN. 

but still not himself. Thus it came about 
that various estimates of his character 
were in circulation among his acquaintances. 
Possibly he did not himself possess much 
more real insight into his own nature than did 
these superficial observers. 

" And whom do you think," the letter went 
on, after describing vividly the horrors of 
Whitecross Street, " whom do you think I 
discovered in one of the foulest recesses of 
this Pandemonium ? No other than my once 
dear friend, Arthur Golding. Of course you 
remember him quite well, though I recollect 
he was not an intimate acquaintance of yours ; 
he did not belong to your set at Balliol. He 
was a schoolfellow of mine to begin with, and 
we never lost sight of each other for more 
than a few weeks at a time during half a 
dozen years or so. Little did I imagine then 
that I should one day find him at the last gasp 
in a London garret. He had written to me, 
poor fellow, begging that I would come and 
see him, as he feared he was drawing to his 
end ; but, by a piece of stupidity on the part 
of my housekeeper, the letter was not for- 
warded to me. 1 found him unconscious. 
After I had watched by his side for some 
time his senses appeared partially to return 
to him. Though he was unable to speak, he 
pointed to his child, a boy of some eight years, 
who lay by his side, and I console myself with 
the idea that rendered his last moments easier- 
by showing that I understood his wish. 



TlIB RECTORY. 43^ 

" Poor Golding ! At his best he was, in ap- 
pearance, the handsomest youth I ever knew ; 
his beauty, indeed, was almost feminine, and, 
I suspect, indicated rather plainly the weak 
parts of his character. I had entirely lost 
sight of him for many years. Even when I 
last parted from him in those brighter days 
he was all but an habitual drunkard ; I re- 
member warning him with all the severity I 
was capable of — Heaven knows that is not 
saying much ! — of the terrible path upon 
which he was entering. But I could little 
foresee the horrors through which his brief 
life would struggle to that pitiful end. 

" I found in his pocket, after his death, a 
long letter, written in an almost illegible 
hand, and intended for myself ; perhaps he 
meant me to receive it after his death, for it 
was ready addressed and stamped, though 
written more than a week before. In this he 
revealed to me a secret I could never have 
suspected. It seems that, shortly after the 
birth of the child, he fell into severe diflB- 
culties, in consequence of which he was ulti- 
mately compelled to obtain a clerkship of 
some kind. His salary, however, proved in- 
suflBcient to his needs, and, in a fatal moment, 
he yielded to a terrible temptation, and 
robbed his employers. He was found out, 
and suffered the punishment for his crime. 
This was the blow that hopelessly shattered 
what little of energy and purpose his life had 
hitherto retained. 



44i WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

** You will wonder how it was that he never 
applied to me for some kind of assistance be- 
fore his ruin had become irretrievable, for, 
with my means and connections, I might well 
have been expected to help him. Ah ! that 
awakens sore memories, and necessitates the 
narrative of a part of my own history, which 
as yet I have never poured into even your 
friendly ears. You must have wondered who 
the wretched woman was who, as Golding's 
wife, bore a share in this life-tragedy, and 
had vanished before the close of it. 

" Do you remember * Laura,' the laughing- 
eyed angel of whom I used to prate to you 
from morning to night ; whom I told you I had 
loved from a child, for whose sake I learned 
by heart one of Petrarch's sonnets every day 
of my life ? It makes me miserable to think 
of her, and I must tell what I have to tell in 
very few words. Well, at the end of the last 
term we spent together at the University, 
Golding came to spend a few weeks with me 
amid the delights of my Warwickshire home. 
At that time, as I have said, he was a charm- 
ing fellow, and a few days sufficed to make 
him as much at his ease with all my friends 
and acquaintances as I was myself. He saw 
Laura, could not but fall madly in love with 
her ; in an evil hour persuaded her to recipro- 
<;ate his passion, and — to cut the story short 
— eloped with her. At first I raved against 
him like a madman, feeling sure he had 



THE RECTORY. 45 

merely carried off the girl to ruin her. Witb 
all my energy I hunted him down, and, to 
my amazement, found that the two were 
married. Of course we quarrelled violently,, 
and there you have the explanation of our 
broken intimacy. 

" Now you will not wonder at my determin- 
ing to adopt his child, whose name is also 
Arthur, for is he not her child, the child of that 
Laura who was once— alas ! alas ! — more 
than the world to me ? Oh, God ! what she 
must have gone through 1 In his letter 
Golding did not mention her name ; but I 
have had the courage to ask the boy what ho 
knew of liis mother, and ho tells me she died 
in the hospital a long time ago. It was a 
relief to hear it. 

"And so I shall brinor the boy up as ray own, 
to be a brother to Helen. Will he grow up 
imbued with his father's vices, and make mo 
wish that I had l^ft him to struggle for his 
bitter existence in the seething sewer out of 
which I have plucked him? Who knows? 
He seems rather a strange lad ; I half think 
I shall like him, for it is certain he has some- 
thing of his mother's face, though most of his 
father's. He is as gentle as a girl, and, I should 
imagine, of very tolerable natural abilities. 
Well, I must do all I can for his education, 
but of course his future lies in the lap of tlie 
gods. I will not fail to acquaint you with Lis 
progress — or the reverse." 



CHAPTER III. 



THE CURATE. 



Mr. Norman, who was but a slight eater, 
adhered to the country rule, and took a mid- 
day dinner. This meal was always shared 
by little Helen, who at other times ate in her 
nursery with Mrs. Cope. The present day 
beheld the unusual spectacle of two children 
at the table, one on each side of the rector, 
who glanced at them alternately : at the one 
with a look of pride and affection, at the 
other with interest, not devoid of pain. 

Truly, the contrast was decided enough. 
On the right hand was the little girl, whose 
young life had known no trouble more severe 
than the cutting of teeth and the whoopitig- 
cough, with bright, chubby face, which 
smiled even during sleep, a head covered 
with ringlets of the purest gold, beneath her 
chin a spotless pinafore, sitting severely up- 
right on her high, cane-bottomed chair, as if 
in conscious dignity of her dominion, past, 
present and to come ; handling her spoon 
with a natural grace, and, at the same time, 
somewhat of an " old-fashioned " air, such as 
would have made a stranger smile ; her figure 
lit up by a ray of sunlight, which streamed 



THE CURATE. 47 

full upon her through the window ; as a rule, 
silent and thoughtful, but when spoken to, 
replying with a considerate gravity or a quiet 
mirth, alike in advance of her years. 

Opposite to her sat the boy, the neglected 
waif of Whitecross Street, whose eight years 
had scarcely known a joy ; in all that regards 
the higher nature of man far more ignorant 
than the little girl ; in all that is base and 
ugly and fearful all but matured in ex- 
perience. 

In his outer appearance there was nothing 
now incongruous or repulsive ; his agreeable 
features looked far better in the neat suit 
of clothes in which he was now attired than 
with the rags in which Mr. Norman had first 
seen him. But for all that it was painful to 
regard him. He evidently felt so completely 
-estranged at this elegant table — he who 
had been accustomed to make his meals 
ofE a crust, gnawed whilst sitting on a door- 
step, or wandering about the streets. He 
did not know what to do with his knife 
and fork, his plate would not remain steady 
whilst he endeavoured to cut his meat ; he 
kept slipping fowards on the chair, which 
was much too large for him ; in short, he was 
utterly miserable. The only thing he could 
really succeed in eating was bread, and of 
that he ate as much as possible to satisfy the 
keen hunger he felt. 

And, in addition to these temporary 



48 WOBKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

troubles, that look of deep sadness still 
rested on his face, bespeaking the one great 
sorrow which oppressed him . In answer to 
the remarks which the rector now and then 
addressed to him, he replied with a mono- 
syllable, hanging his head, and seeming 
frightened at the sound of his own voice- 
He kept looking on each side of him, 
nervously apprehensive lest anyone should be 
watching him. Out of absolute pity, Mr» 
Norman cut the dinner as short as possible. 

When released from table, Arthur, being 
told he might dispose of himself as he would, 
wandered out into the orchard behind the 
house, and finding a bench placed in an out- 
of-the-way corner, sat down and gave him- 
self up to his thoughts, whatever they were. 

Meantime little Helen, as usual after dinner, 
had drawn a footstool close to her father's 
arm-chair and sat gazing upon the fire reflec- 
tively, waiting for the usual conversation to 
be opened. Her father did not appear likely 
to open his lips first, so the little girl broke 
silence. 

" Father, you said Arthur's father was 
dead?" 

"Yes, dear." 

" And why doesn't Arthur wear black ?" 

The rector paused for a moment, then re- 
plied by asking another question. 

" Do you think it right to wear black when 
a relative dies, Helen ?" 



THE CURATE. 49 



€€ 



Everybody does so, father." 

**And why do they?" 

" I suppose to show that they are sorry." 

" More often to make a show of sorrow 
they do not feel, Helen. If one is really sorry 
what is gained by letting all the world know 
it?" 

" Then you do not think it right to wear 
black, father?" 

. ** It is a custom ; but I think a rather 
foolish one." 

There was a long pause, during which Helen 
reflected on this point. 

" Father," she said, at length, ** are not a 
great many customs very foolish ?" 

** Very many, dear." 

" Then if they are foolish, and people 
know it, as of course they must do, why 
ever do not people cease doing such things ?" 

Helen had now come to one of those 
knotty points which she had not unfrequently 
arrived at in her mental excursions. As she 
spoke her fine eyes sparkled and her voice 
trembled with a species of irritation. 

Shaking back her curls with a pretty little 
movement which was habitual to her, she sat 
looking up into her father's face, awaiting an 
answer. 

" Custom, Helen," replied Mr. Norman 
with a smile, as he ran his fingers through 
the golden ringlets which hid the child's ears, 
" is a mighty god which, more or less, all the 

VOL. I. E 



60 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

world worships, and to which it offers the 
most precious sacrifices — often that which it 
holds dearest. It does not matter whether 
they are willing or not to make the sacrifice. 
They have all their lives worshipped the god 
Custom with their eyes open, and whatever it be 
that he claims from them they are bound to 
lay it upon his altar and there burn it. Some- 
times it is with bursting hearts that they see 
their dearest hopes perishing in the flame ; 
but it avails nothing. The god Custom is 
without pity." 

" I understand you, father," replied the 
child, nodding her head gravely. And again 
there was silence for some time. Helen was 
the first to break it. 

** Father, I read to you the other morning 
about the religion of the Greeks. The book 
said that we are better than the Greeks, for 
they had a great many false gods, whilst 
we have only one, the true one. Don't you 
think we also have a great many false gods ? 
Is not the god Custom one of them ?" 

The rector looked with some surprise at 
the speaker ; but he evidently had a keen 
delight in her precocious wisdom. 

" You are very right, Helen," he replied. 
** The only difference is that we do not openly 
•confess our gods, or make images of them. 
The gods of the Greeks were beautiful, and 
their images still form the noblest creations 
of art which the world has seen. Were we 



THE CURATE. 51 

to make images of our false gods, they would 
be so terribly hideous that men would run 
away from them." 

" But is it possible, father, to worship 
these many false gods and the one true God 
at the same time ?" 

" There are very few indeed worship the 
true God," replied the rector, gravely. " Even 
many of those who think they do so have 
really no idea what God is." 

" I am glad you think so, father. There 
is Mrs. Simpson, who teaches in the Sunday 
school, and who is always asking us such 
nasty questions about the Devil ; don't you 
think she is one of those people, father?" 

Mr. Norman merely smiled. 

Helen was too wise to press for a more ex- 
plicit reply. After reflecting for a moment, 
she laid her hand on her father s knee, and, 
looking up into his face with that expression 
of pure simplicity blended with curious in- 
telligence, which gave such an unutterable 
charm to her young face, asked — 

" Father, what 2*5 God?" 

Edward Norman started, and for a mo- 
ment averted his face; but he quickly 
recovered himself, and, fondling the child's 
hands in both his own, spoke gravely. 

" That is a more difficult question than 
you think, my dear little girl. It is the most 
difficult question that we can ask ourselves 
in this world. Do you ever feel that you have 



52 WOBKERS IN THE DAWN. 

it in your power to choose between twa 
things you would like to do, and when you 
come to think them over, see clearly that one^ 
is good and the other bad?'* 

"Oh, often, father!" 

" And which do you feel you ought to do^ 
the good thing or the bad thing ?" 

" The good thing." 

" Very well. Did you ever compare two 
objects together and say to yourself that one 
is beautiful and one is ugly ?" 

" Often." 

" And which of these would you keep if 
you had the choice ?" 

" The beautiful thing, of course." 

" You are right. Then you have learned 
that there is something in your mind which 
gives you the power of distinguishing between 
a good and a bad action, a beautiful and an 
ugly thing, and also bids you choose the good 
and the beautiful rather than the bad or the 
ugly. And this something is God." 

Helen made no reply, and very shortly 
after she rose, kissed her father, as usual, and 
ran to look for Arthur. 

Edward Norman passed the rest of his 
afternoon in writing letters. 

Shortly after tea, in accordance with the 
arrangement made with Mr. Whiffle, the 
rector set out in Arthur's company for the 
curate's residence. This was situated some 
quarter of an hour's walk off, and the w^ay 



THE CUEATB. 53 

thither led across bare fields. Mr. Norman 
took the boy's hand, and questioned him as 
they walked, "endeavouring to destroy the 
painful diffidence which marked Arthur*s 
conduct in his company. Between the ques- 
tions and replies, Arthur looked up once or 
twice as if about to speak, but always dropped 
his head when his eye met Mr. Norman's. 

" Is there something you wish to say, 
Arthur?" asked the latter, at length. 

** Where — where have they buried father, 
sir ? " was the question spoken in trembling 
tones. 

" I will take you to see some day," replied 
the rector. 

" You will ? " asked Arthur, with eager- 
ness. 

*^ Yes, but not just yet. Do you think 
you can be happy with us here, Arthur?" 

" I'll try to be, sir," replied the boy. 

Then the rector began to describe the 
delights of the country in summer time, the 
beauty of the fields when they had cast off 
their winter garments, and clad themselves 
with grass and flowers and sunlight, to greet 
the coming of spring; he did his best to 
interest the boy in scenes and occupations 
which the latter's fancy, through inexperience 
of the beautiful, was quite unable to realise. 
He did not seem heedless to these prospects, 
for once or twice he looked up at the speaker 
with an expression of surprise, but then 



54 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

ensued a sigh as the old look of melancholy- 
took possession of his features. 

" I am taking you, Arthur," said the 
rector, at last, " to see a gentleman who 
will do his best to teach you, and make a 
clever man of you. You say you never went 
to school ? " 

" No, sir. Father began to teach me ta 
read, but he hadn't time, and soon left off. 
He always said the school cost too much." 

" Do you think you shall like to learn ?" 

" I think so, sir." 

" That's right. A man is very little use 
in the world if he has not a good deal of 
knowledge, so I know you will do your best 
to learn all Mr. Whiffle wishes to teach you." 

" Father knew a great deal." 

" Did he ? Who told you so, Arthur ?" 

" I remember mother saying so, a long 
time ago. But she said that learning was 
no good, and didn't bring in any money." 

" That is not the only use of learning, my 
boy. But here we are ; we will talk about it 
again as we go home." 

It was now quite dark, and the wind, 
which grew colder and stronger, was howling 
over the long hill-side, and sweeping hither 
and thither clouds of rustling skeleton leaves. 
The house they stood before had a parti- 
cularly desolate appearance. In front of it 
was what should have been a garden, a space 
some six yards long by four deep, in the 



THE CURATE. 55 

middle of which grew a hideous abortion of 
a tree. Whether it was that the aesthetic 
sentiments of the Whiffle family possessed 
but little prominence, or that the lack of 
space necessitated the preference of the useful 
to the agreeable, this space was converted 
into a yard for drying clothes, the abortive 
tree servinof as a centre, whence a number of 
clothes-lines radiated, being affixed to poles 
planted against the low wall encircling the 
space. At present these lines were thickly 
hung with linen, which, thanks to the efforts 
of the night wind, was careering about the 
lines in a frantic manner, producing a de- 
cidedly peculiar effect when seen through the 
dark. Glimmering behind these self-con- 
stituted streamers appeared a few feeble 
lights, apparently coming from the windows 
of the house. A wicket in the wall gave 
admission to the sacred precincts, and Mr. 
Norman entered with his companion. As 
they drew near the door, above all the dismal 
howling of the wind, the cracking and flapping 
of the wet clothes, and the shrill rustling of 
dead leaves, such a chorus of infantine screams 
and squalls, mingled with such a shouting of 
maturer voices, the whole being accompanied 
by what appeared to be a beating upon drums, 
an occasional blowing of a horn, and the not 
unfrequent crash as of falling crockery, met 
the astonished ear, that Mr. Norman might 
well be excused when he knocked hastily and 



56 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

loudly, in fear lest some sudden misfortune 
had befallen the dwelling of his worthy 
curate. The knock remained unanswered, 
and it appearing to the rector that the 
urgency of the case warranted a slight dis- 
regard of ceremony, he turned the handle and 
entered the house. 

In front appeared a flight of stairs, upon 
which a small oil lamp stood, faintly illumin- 
ing the entrance. On either hand was a door, 
that on the right being, as Mr. Norman was 
aware, the door of the curate's so-called 
study, that to the lef b leading into the room 
where the family mostly lived. The latter 
stood slightly ajar, and from the other side 
of it proceeded the hubbub, which was as yet 
far from diminishing. On pushing open the 
door, an extraordinary scene disclosed itself. 
In a room tolerably well furnished as dining 
and sitting-room combined, appeared to be 
collected the whole of the Whiffle family; 
Mr. Orlando Whiffle, Mrs. Whiffle, and the 
eight children. Half the table was covered 
with a white cloth, and laid with tea things, 
the other half was covered with a heap of 
newly-washed clothes, which Mrs. Whiffle 
had evidently been in the process of ironing 
when the present /racas commenced. The 
following was the tableau : in the centre of 
the room stood Mr. Whiffle, his coat thrown 
off, his hair more stubbornly self-assertive 
than ever, in the act of administering corporal 



THE OCJRATE. 57 

punishment to his first-born, Master Augustus 
Whiffle. With one arm he had secured the 
ilithe youngster in that position which is 
technically known as '' chancery," while the 
other hand, armed with a schoolmasters cane, 
•descended with alarming rapidity upon the 
most sensitive portion of the captive's frame. 
From every pore of Mr. Whiffle's body the 
perspiration streamed profusely, and, not 
•content with the violence of his muscular 
exertion, he was engaged in the hopeless task 
of endeavouring to drown with his own voice 
the yells of his struggling victim. Poor Mrs. 
Whiffle, a very little, inoffensive-looking 
woman, from whose eyes the tears were 
streaming at the sight of young Augustus' 
sufferings, was doing her best with cries and 
entreaties to mitigate her husband's wrath, 
whilst at the same time it was all she could 
do to exercise surveillance over the other 
seven children. Three of these, two girls 
and a very little boy, had crept under the 
table in terror, where, notwithstanding, they 
were doing their best simultaneously to empty 
3, small pot of jam, one moment squalling in 
fright and sympathy, the next licking their 
lips in satisfaction after .a delicious mouthful. 
Another little boy, evidently hard-hearted 
and callous to his brother's sufferings, had 
taken advantage of his mother's back being 
turned, to mount a lofty chair and grasp at 
a sugar basin which stood on the top shelf 



o8 WOBKEBS IN THS DAWN, 

cf an open cupboard, and now stood balancings 
liiraself in a position which was not a little 
dangerous. The sixth, a little girl, Mrs. 
Whiffle had inadvertently knocked over into 
the fire-place, and was now endeavouring, 
by the way, as it were, to solace, but only 
with the result of increasing its howling. 
And, finally, the seventh and eighth, who 
were twins, and were now lying together in 
a cradle close by the table, not content with 
vying in the exercise of their shrill pipes, 
were taking a still more effective method 
of attracting attention by lugging one corner 
of the table cloth, which they had succeeded 
in catching hold of, till one by one the tea 
things began to roll on to the floor, some 
breaking, some spilling their contents, all 
adding their individual cracks and bumps 
to the total of domestic discord. 

The appearance of the rector at the door 
was instantaneous in its effect, one moment 
din insufferable, the next, absolute silence,, 
save for the suppressed moaning of the twins, 
the sobs of the rest of the children and their 
mother, and the pantings of Mr. Whiffle, 
whose appearance, as he stood with one arm 
still raised over the body of his prostrate 
son, made a very excellent caricature of a 
victorious gladiator appealing to the verdict 
of thumbs. Silence was broken by the rector s 
mild and good-natured tones. 

"1 fear I have come at an inopportune 



THE CQEATE. 50 

Tnoment," he said, bowing courteously to 
the distracted lady of the house, who was 
hurriedly doing her best to put things in 
order. 

"Not at all, my dear sir, not at all," 
panted Mr. Whifl9e, in his usual sprightly 
manner, wiping his forehead the while with 
an immense yellow silk handkerchief. " You 
beheld me in the act of visiting with condign 
chastisement a refractory young son of the 
Church, that is all, I assure you." 

Then, turning to his wife, he added — 

" My dear, I quite neglected to tell you 
that Mr. Norman was so good as to promise 
to look in this evening. My dear sir, this 
incorrigible young Israelite, whom I should 
have called Benoni rather than Augustus, 
for he verily seems destined to be the son 
of my sorrow, was, just before you entered, 
caught in the very act — in flagrante delicto — 
of emptying the milk pot over a sermon 
which I have been at more than usual pains 
to compose. Do you not agree with me in 
thinking that even now the offence exceeds 
the punishment?" 

Mr. Norman replied by a few humorous 
remarks, and then proceeded by means of 
a little kindly attention to each of the 
children, as his manner was, to restore what 
order he could into this house of perpetual 
discord. By accepting Mrs. Whiffle's offer 
of a cup of tea, he caused a smile once- 



60 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

more to rise to the face of that much suffer- 
ing woman, who was indeed so accustomed to 
episodes such as that just concluded that it 
very soon passed out of her mind. 

The cup of tea finished as soon as possible, 
he left Arthur to the attention of Mrs. 
Whiffle and her brood, and gladly accepted 
the curate's invitation to cross the passage 
and enter the study. Here the disorder was 
little inferior to that exhibited in the other 
room, but as it was onlybooks that were strpwn 
about in every corner, in every stage of 
delapidation, and mostly covered with the 
thickest conceivable layer of dust, the rpctor 
bore it with more equanimity. Mr. Whiffle 
-enUvened a small fire which was struggling in 
the grate, and invited his visitor to be seated. 

" You must be very fond of children, Mr. 
Whiffle," began the rector, whilst the other 
was putting on a very ragged old coat which 
he took from behind the door. 

" Yes, sir, yes — that is, moderately fond of 
them. Not that I should care to have a large 
family, though. Large families, in my 
opinion, are the source of much evil. Indeed, 
that is one of the tendencies of the present 
age against which the Church ought really to 
exert the plenitude of its powers. Yes ; one 
should preach a crusade against large families. 
I have, in fact, a pamphlet in hand on that 
very subject. I hope to finish it in a week, 
^nd then I shall be so bold as to request the 



THE CUBATB. 61 

favour of your perusal and judgment, my 
dear sir." 

Mr, Norman did not smile, or indeed 
express any especial interest in the matter ; 
he was too well accustomed to his curate's 
humours. Orlando WhiflBe never seemed to 
entertain the slightest suspicion that some 
might be tempted to consider his own family 
as already deserving of the epithet — large. 
Of this he was perfectly unconscious. And 
when he announced the speedy completion of 
a pamphlet on the subject he was equally 
unconscious of exposing another of his pecu- 
liarities which might well have excited a sense 
of the ridiculous. It was — or was supposed 
to be — the constant occupation of his leisure 
to engage in the composition of pamphlets on 
an infinity of subjects, with the curious cir- 
cumstance that he had never been known to 
publish, or indeed to complete, one of them. 
At least three times a week he announced to 
the rector his intention immediately to sub- 
mit to his criticism a brief brochure on some 
burning question of the day ; but Mr. Nor- 
man's critical powers must have languished 
from inaction had they found no other field 
than Mr. Whiffle's literary productions. But 
to the curate himself there was nothings 
ridiculous in all this; he simply was not 
aware of his own inconsistencies. 

Having turned aside the literary topic, 
with a suitable remark, Edward Norman then 



62 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

proceeded to tl^e more immediate object of 
his visit, and stated briefly the plan he thought 
it would be advisable to pursue in Arthur's 
preliminary instruction. 

** Have you thought at all, sir," asked Mr. 
WhiflBe, ** what his career in life shall be ?" 

" Not precisely. It is hardly a momentous 
question yet." 

*' Train him up to the service of the 
Temple !" cried Mr. WhiflBe, with enthusi- 
asm. " Make of him a pillar of the Estab- 
lishment ! I have thought over the matter 
the whole day, my dear sir, and the more I 
reflect upon that boy's features the more con- 
vinced I am that he was born to be a bishop. 
I once entered upon an exhaustive study of 
comparative physiognomy, my dear sir, and 
even went so far as to pen a pamphlet on 
what I purposed making one division of a 
great work : the ' Ecclesiastical Physi- 
ognomy.' I will hunt it up and let you see it. 
Close study of the countenances of our pre- 
lates, sir, has given me fundamental ideas on 
the subject. I pronounce it : Arthur Golding 
will one day rule a diocese, and to Orlando 
WhiflBe will be due the credit of having 
instilled into his mind the fundamental prin- 
ciples of the great Establishment he is to 
adorn !" 

*'We shall see," responded the rector, 
coolly, " whether he shows a turn for the 
Church." 



THE CURATE. 63 

"A turn, my dear sir! In a child of his 
^ofe there is no — no turn ! We can make 
what we like of him ! That is the very point 
I always insist upon as firmly in my argu- 
ments on the subject of education. If only 
The Church is permitted an opportunity of 
•conducting the education of children from 
their earliest years, she will have no difficulty 
in imbuing one and all with sound Church 
principles. It is the decreasing influence of 
The Church in this sphere of youthful educa- 
tion to which is due the prevalence of false 
doctrine, heresy and schism, and to which 
will ere long be attributed the downfall of 
this nation's prosperity !" 

It will be observed that I always print 
^* The Church " in Mr. Whifflo's speeches, 
for, indeed, the capitals are my only possible 
method of indicating the tone in which he 
pronounced these words. All the arrogance 
of priestly tyrann}'', all the bombast of 
clerical professions, all the fatuity of ecclesi- 
astical self-esteem arose before the mind like 
s, picture at the sound of '' The Church " as 
pronounced by Mr. Whiffle. The man 
gloried in the words ; he rolled them on his 
tongue as an exquisite delicacy. And yet it 
would have been difficult to account for his 
enthusiasm, for as yet the Clmrch had given 
him nothing save various curacies, the in- 
comes of which scarcely sufficed to maintain 
his ever-increasing family. In all probability 



64 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

it was his fundamentally vulgar nature 
sympathising with the arrogant pretentions 
and abortive performances of the institution 
lie belonged to. Pre-eminence in the Church 
was for Mr. WhiflBe the goal of all earthly 
wishes, and it was very characteristic of the 
man's nature that down in the depths of his 
heart, unspoken midst all his inconsequential 
chatter, rested and grew a firm expectation 
that one day, though it might be long in 
coming, that Church would recognise the- 
abilities of its faithful servant, and Orlando 
Whiffle would, even in this life, find his re- 
ward. 

It was the favourite employment of his 
reveries to trace his own hypothetical course 
up the scale of clerical dignities till, in sweet 
fancy, he saw himself pocketing the first 
year s income of a bishop's see. For in his 
devotion to the Establishment he was by no 
means free from worldlv views, thoucrh it 
would be inaccurate to represent these as his 
onlv motive. Whenever conversation touched 
on the subject of ecclesiastical salaries, as it 
not unfit quently would when a few curates 
of the eouiitrv-side met too^ether, Orlando 
Whiffle felt himself in his element. He pos- 
sessed an amount of knowledge on the sub- 
ject to which few could pretend. On this, 
indeed, he might have been capable ot writing 
a pamphlet, and a rtmaikably interesting 
pamphlet it would have been. He was great 



THK CURATE. 65 

on the topic of simony, spoke of it with a 
kind of predilection, and a calm ignoring of 
moral objections such as only an ecclesiastic 
can pretend to. Clerical agencies he was 
well acquainted with, and could tell you their 
respective advantages or disadvantages better 
than the agents themselves. But most de- 
lightful was it to hear him speak of a clerical 
scandal, any disgraceful case that might for 
the moment be attracting attention in the 
papers. What breathless interest he took in 
such revelations. Shame ! he exhibited not 
a grain of it. He gloried in the foulest 
details. You would have thought, to hear 
him, that no one but a clergyman had aright 
to disgrace the name of humanity. 

But to return to our narration. The inter- 
view did not last long, for the terms, which 
were no unimportant item in the business, 
were speedily and satisfactorily arranged. 
When the two returned to the parlour they 
found Arthur sitting on a stool by the tire- 
side, quite surrounded by a swarm of young 
Whiffles, who were assailing him with all 
manner of questions, and had evidently suc- 
ceeded in making him perfectly uncomfort- 
able. 

" Well, my dear boj^" exclaimed the 
curate, laying his hands upon his head, *' to- 
morrow we take our first trip on the flowery 
paths of culture. Have you learnt your 
Catechism, my boy ?" 

VOL. I. ¥ 



66 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

Arthur looked up in bewilderment, then 
turned away from the faces gazing at him, 
and shook his head. 

" Cheer up, Arthur !" put in Mr. Norman, 
encouragingly. " We'll soon remedy all that, 
won't we ?" 

It was not many minutes before they took 
their departure, and the boy was evidently 
glad to exchange the warm but noisy room 
for the dark, windy fields. As the rector 
passed out of the door, Mr. Whiffle took the 
opportunity of whispering to him — 

" A bishop, my dear sir ; a bishop, or I'll 
never prophesy again !" 



CHAPTER IV. 



HOME-SICK. 



Two or three days passed, and Mr. Whiffle 
had seen no reason to alter his preconceived 
opinion. The boy, though; as might have 
been expected, very ignorant, was far from 
stupid, and his extreme docility rendered the 
task of teaching him decidedly agreeable. 
When Arthur was able to read all the letters 
of the alphabet readily and correctly, Mr. 
Whiffle grew elate ; his sanguine temperament 
made him already look forward to the day 
when he should commence the Greek Testa- 
ment with his pupil. Already he saw him 
grown into a promising young prig, carping 
:at interpretations of the Sacrament, and 
dogmatizing on the Holy Ghost. Unhappily, 
Mr. Whiffle's anticipations were not destined 
to fulfilment. 

When with his tutor, or in the company of 
any of the family, Arthur preserved a quiet, 
sad demeanour, doing his best to answer with 
a smile when spoken to, but at other times 
showing little, if any, interest in what went 
on around him. It was clear to every one 
that on the third day of his presence at the 
Rectory he was not a whit more at home thaa 



68 WOEKEKS IN THE DAWN. 

he had been on the first. Edward Norman 
took him occasionally for a short walk, spoke 
to him comfortingly and encouragingly, and 
did his best to win the boy's confidence ; but 
the rector was hardly of that nature which 
disposes itself readily to enter into the joys 
and the sorrows of children ; when he spoke 
to Arthur it was as he would have spoken to 
a grown.-up person. He was quite unable ta 
understand the state of that young mind, 
darkened with ignorance and all the dreary 
memories of the past, or of the over-sensitive 
heart, wrung with unutterable grief at the 
loss of a father. Mrs. Cope was more suc- 
cessful in . understanding his sorrows ; once 
or twice a few kind, motherly words from her 
brought the hot tears rushing from the child's 
eyes, and so gave him relief for the moment. 
But even she rapidly became aware that it 
was not an ordinary nature with which they 
had to deal, and foresaw that the process of 
reconciling him to his new life would be long 
and painful. To little Helen, Arthur was 
evidently a profound mystery. She would 
frequently take a book to a stool at a little 
distance from him, and then, under the 
pretence of reading, in reality sit watching 
him for a long time. On one such occasion 
Mr. Norman had withdrawn from the room, 
and the children were left alone together. 
Arthur was sitting on a low chair, his hands 
clasped over his knees, his head drooping 







HOME-SIOK. 69 

down on his breast, and in tlio stillness of the 
room, only broken by the crackling of a bright 
fire, Helen could hear him sighing from time 
to time. After watching him for many 
minutes with a curiously reflective look, she 
suddenly rose and went to his side. 

Arthur," she said, " why do you sit so ? " 
1 am thiuking of my father," replied 
Arthur, who was under less restraint with 
Helen than with the others. 

** Was he a good father ? " asked the little 
girl. " Was he like mine ? " 

" He was very good ; but ho wasn't as rich 
as your father." 

" If he was good, Arthur," resumed Helen, 
after a moment's reflection, " why didn't he 
teach you to read, like my father does me ? 
You are older than I am, you know." 

" He used to toll mo it was better to know 
nothing. He said I should bo better off if I 
couldn t read or write." 

Helen opened her eyes very wide. 

" Then I'm sure ho wasn't good if he said 
that," she pronounced decidedly. "My father 
tells me that a man is no good in the world 
if he can't read and write, and I'm sure father 
knows." 

The boy had again sunk his hoad, and made 
no reply. 

"And my father says," pursued Helen, 
** that the more you know, the more good you 
are able to do to people. That's why I'm 



70 WOBKERS IN THE DAWN. 

learning as much as I can. I mean to do a 
great deal of good some day, Arthur ; don't 
you ? " 

** I don't know how," replied the boy, 
looking curiously up into Helen's face. 

" Oh, but I do ! When I'm a little older 
I'm going to teach a school in Bloomford, and 
I shall only take those children that are poor 
and can't afford to pay anything ; father says 
I may. And when I'm old enough to have 
money of my own, I shall go and see the 
poor people in Bloomford — and there are a 
great many, you know — and I shall give them 
a shilling at a time — father says it isn't wise 
to give too much — to buy what they want 
with. Don't you think you'd like to do that^ 
Arthur ? " 

" Perhaps so," replied the boy. 

" Arthur," resumed Helen, '* what are you 
going to be when you're a man ? '' 

" Don't know." 

** I know what I should be." 

"What?" 

" I should write books, books like those in 
father's study. I don't mean silly tale books, 
but books that would do people good. Father 
says there's nothing like a good book, and 
I'm sure he's right." 

She waited for a reply, but none came. It 
was evident that Arthur's thoughts were far 
away ; he did not seem to have heard her last 
sentence at all. With a little sigh of im- 



TIOME-SIOK. 71 

patience she rose from her seat, shaking the 
golden ringlets from her face. 

"Arthur!" she exclaimed, after looking 
round the room thoughtfully. 

" What." 

** Do you like looking at pictures ? " 

" I — E think so," he replied, with hesita- 
tion. 

Helen took off a side table a large volume 
of engravinjys which it was all she could do 
to carry. Placing it on the door in front of 
her companion she opened it gravely and in- 
vited Arthur to inspect it with her. Little 
by little the boy's interest increased; he 
listened more attentively to Helen's explana- 
tions, and began himself to make comments. 
Here at length was something attractive 
enough to hold his attention and liberate his 
mind from perpetual brooding over his 
sorrows. For nearly an hour the two were 
deeply engaged — Helen explaining at length 
in her precocious manner, here and there 
pointing a moral, and always referring to 
what her father had said with regard to any 
unusually knotty point ; Arthur listening 
attentively, occasionally asking questions 
which displayed considerably more intelligence 
than would have been expected, and even at 
times laughing, though this very rarely. 
Whilst they were in the middle of the volume 
Mr. Norman opened the door. He was not 
observed, and, after gazing with some 



72 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

astonisliment at the unusual sight, he with- 
drew quietly, without disturbing them. 

But the relief proved oilly moraentary. 
When next Helen desired to amuse her com- 
panion in the same manner, it soon appeared 
that the novelty had passed away ; she could 
not succeed in arousing in him more than a 
languid interest. His desire of loneliness in- 
creased. Whenever an opportunity presented 
itself he would steal out of sight to that 
remote corner of the orchard, which he had 
discovered, and there would sit for hours, 
hidden from the windows at the back of the 
house by a thick holly-tree, insensible to the 
cold, which began to be severe, and even to 
rain and snow. Mr. WhiflBe began to enter- 
tain less sanguine hopes with regard to his 
pupil. His progress by no means kept pace 
with the expectations which the first few days 
had excited. The boy seemed to dread the 
recurring lesson-hours, and at times was even 
stubborn when Mr. Whiffle essayed the in- 
fluence of a little severity. It was very clear 
that Arthur Golding would never be taught 
by force. 

** A frightful example, my dear sir," ex- 
claimed the curate to Mr. Norman, after a 
more than usually hopeless hour, " a frightful 
example of early years passed without the 
salutary influence of clerical admonition ! I 
do not say positively that I renounce my hopes 
with regard to his future — but I fear, I fear." 



HOME-SICK. 73 

It was now drawing on to Christmas, and 
the approach of that season brought accession 
•of life to the rather monotonous routine of 
the Rectory. A distant cousin of Mr. Norman, 
who had no blood relations living, had 
xecently been married, and now, in accord- 
ance with an invitation, brought his wife to 
pass the Christmas atBloomford. This young 
lady, who was of a remarkably mercurial dis- 
position, soon succeeded in effecting what she 
styled a reformation in the domestic arrange- 
ments of her reverend cousin. She immedi- 
ately interested herself in all the leading 
families of the neighbourhood, threw herself 
with enthusiasm into the multifarious schemes 
for Christmas festivities in connection with 
the Church, which hitherto had been left 
•entirely to the care of Mr. Whiffle, subscribed 
for Christmas trees, gave her co-operation to- 
wards a Christmas bazaar, and made herself, 
in a very few days, a conspicuous feature in the 
frivolous life of Bloomf ord. The consequence 
was l^hat the Rectory was invaded by a host 
of visitors. Mr. Norman shrugged his 
shoulders and began devoutly to wish that he 
had never invited the disturber of his dearly- 
loved quietude. But it could not be said that 
his cousin gave him any trouble beyond, 
indeed, taking possession of all the best 
rooms in his house. She installed herself as 
mistress, herself gave instructions with regard 
to the meals, herself invited whom she pleased 



i4i WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

to tea, paying no attention whatever to the 
civil hints of Mrs. Cope, who was nothing 
less than scandalised at this unwonted boule^ 
versement of her time-honoured supremacy. 
All the young ladies of Bloomford seized upon 
the opportunity with joy. Once more did 
Mr. Norman become a subjecfc of active 
interest, once more was his persistent bachelor- 
hood cried shame upon by all eligible ladies, 
once more did the attacks upon his suscepti- 
bilities commence, and this time in his own 
house. The vote and interest of the mercu- 
rial cousin was solicited far and near, and she 
promised her best exertions on behalf of some 
dozen confidential old ladies who had 
daughters they were extremely desirous of 
getting off their hands. Mr. Norman was 
dragged perforce from the retirement of his 
study ; he was made to take part personally 
in the ornamenting of the church with ever- 
greens ; he was beguiled by his lively cousin 
into visits to all sorts of people at all possible 
or impossible hours, and was always received 
with a degree of attention quite alarming, 
and which he could not in the least under- 
stand ; he was made the recipient of more 
invitations than he could possibly respond to. 
Everybody was all at once dreadfully solicitous 
with regard to his health. Though no one 
knew his precise ailment it was obvious that 
he had drooped during the last few years, and 
how sad a thing it was for so delightful a man 



HOME-SICK. 75 

to sink into a premature grave unsoothed by 
the tender cares of wifely affection. Many 
old ladies adopted the motherly tone towards 
him, and told him plainly that he ought ta 
marry. Edward Norman merely smiled, and 
gave his promise that ho would think the 
matter over. And as often as he succeeded 
in shaking off the hounds and bestowing him- 
self safely in tlie cool recesses of his study, 
he vowed internally that when once these 
visitors had taken their departure he would 
never again open his house to them or any 
one else. 

The position of the children in the house 
during all this ferment was not a pleasant one. 
The hruyante cousin could not bo expected to 
entertain any liking for such " troublesome 
little chits," as she termed them, and, on the 
part of Helen at least, this distaste was cordi- 
ally reciprocated. 

The little lady was, to begin with, mor- 
tally jealous. What right had this stranger 
to come and monopolise the society of her 
father — her fiither, in whom her being was 
centred ? Since the strangers had been in 
the house her regular lesson hours had been 
hopelessly disturbed. Instead of going to 
her father's study and reading to him on a 
stool by his knee for certain hours during the 
day, as she had always been accustomed to 
, do, she was now obliged to do her lessons 
with Mrs. Cope, and, after her father, Helen 



76 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

considered that to look up to Mrs. Cope as a 
teacher was decidedly infra dig. The way in 
which the little woman revenged herself was 
characteristic. Instead of reading from her 
book like a docile pupil, waiting for Mrs. 
Cope's corrections and comments, and con- 
sulting her with regard to diflBculties, she 
constituted herself the teacher, and made her 
book a kind of text, upon which she pro- 
ceeded to discourse to the old lady in a highly 
improving manner, never failing to refer to 
*' her father " as the ultimate source of appeal 
in any case where her dictum and that of Mrs. 
Cope found themselves at hopeless variance. 

But this state of affairs, though occasion- 
ally flattering to Helen's vanity, was, she 
felt, very far from satisfactory ; and she not 
unfrequently delivered her sentiments anent 
the prolonged visit of the cousins in no un- 
mistakable terms. 

As for Arthur, the poor boy was depressed 
almost to illness. Mrs. Cope had discovered 
his seat in the orchard, and took every op- 
portunity of disturbing him when he retired 
thither, fancying that he only required to be 
kept in the presence of the family to throw 
aside his mopish habits. The result was, 
that he found another place, in a field, still 
further away from the house, and often sat 
there beneath a hedge, on the damp ground, 
till he was all but insensible from cold and 
lunger. 



HOME-SICK. 77 

On his return from such prolonged ab- 
sences Mrs. Cope would sometimes scold 
him severely; but this had the effect of 
hardening his mind against her. Once when 
she had been unusually severe, he suddenly 
turned upon her with eyes that flashed with 
anger, his cheeks pale as death, and his little 
hands clenched together ; and when she 
shrank back, quite frightened at his look, ho 
burst into a violent fit of weeping, and threw 
himself passionately all his length upon the 
floor. 

The same afternoon he asked a servant, 
who had often spoken kindly to him, the way 
to London ; and she, without thinking much 
of his reasons for asking such a question, told 
him in reply the names of several villages 
through which the road lay. He said nothing, 
but walked away thoughtfully. 

Mr. WhiflSe had given him up as a bad job, 
though he still continued to give him his 
lessons pro forma. Once Arthur fairly 
played truant at lesson hour, and the rector 
sent him that evening to the curate's house 
to ask pardon by way of penance. Mr. 
WhiflSe improved the occasion. 

*'Did he not know by this time that 
obedience to pastors and masters was en- 
joined by the Catechism of the Church of 
England as by law established ? Did he 
not know, moreover, that to play truant was, 
from a mere worldly point of view, a piece of 



78 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

gross disrespect towards the teacher, and 
that, in a case where that teacher was an 
ordained minister of the Church this disre- 
spect amounted to irreligion? Had he no 
hankering after the sweets of a liberal educa- 
tion ? Did it not cut him to the heart to 
visit the church on Sunday and, from abso- 
lute inability to read the Prayer-book, be 
obliged to keep staring about him to see 
when the congregation stood, when they sat, 
and when they knelt?" &c., &c., &c. 

But all this wrought no impression upon 
the poor lad. In the depths of his heart was 
a firmly-rooted suffering which Mr. Whiffle 
Avas quite incapable of comprehending, and 
which Edward Norman divined, indeed, but 
knew not how to remedy. 

Arthur felt away from home ; Bloomford 
could never be anything to him but a foreign 
land. Throughout the whole of his young life 
he had never known but one true friend, and 
that friend his father. Despite all the miser- 
able excesses by which he hastened his death 
— despite the fearful valley of sufFering 
through which he had dragged his poor 
child, Golding had truly loved the boy, and 
Arthur had passionately reciprocated his 
affection. Though throughout the last two 
years of his life Golding had passed through 
all the stages of brutalisation which it is 
possible for such a nature as his, originally 
liar from bad, to undergo, he had never onoo 



V 



HOME-SICK. 79 

shown active cruelty to his child, had never 
once struck him, and had never used harsh 
language to him without the next moment 
bitterly repenting and doing liis best to atone. 
True, he had half-starved the boy, had 
brought him up in foul haunts of poverty, 
wretchedness and crime, where it was a 
miracle his young nature retained anything 
of nobility, had utterly neglected to teach 
him, had even cynically said that he would 
•get through his life better if he remained 
rude and untaught. Yet all this was the 
result of impaired faculties rather than of an 
ill-disposed heart. 

More than half his days he had been mad 
with the poison of drink. Often and often 
he reproached himself with the fierce energy 
of a ruined soul for all the wrongs he was 
guilty of towards his offspring ; many an oath 
he took to amend his vile life if only for the 
sake of Arthur ; but when the hour of temp- 
tation came again he was as powerless to 
resist as the pebble dragged back into the 
depths of the ocean by the cliff-rending 
breaker. 

And for all that the child loved him with 
all the strength of an intensely affectionate 
nature, clung to him as the sole object upon 
which to expend the riches of his overflowing 
heart, impossible to depict the agony which 
in a moment clouded his life when he knew 
that his father was dead. And ever since he 



80 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

had been at Bloomford this agony had gnawed 
at the springs of youthful energy and hope, 
had made his life, in the midst of these uq- 
sympathising strangers, a very tor me at to 
him. He had become possessed of an ever- 
growing, irrepressible desire to return to 
London. 

He knew that he should no more find his 
father there, that he had not a friend to whom 
he could appeal for assistance; but still there 
was the dumb, strong desire to find himself 
once more in the scenes where he had lived 
with his father ; he felt that he should then 
be more at home. He would visit his father's 
grave ; the people of the house he had lived 
in would tell him where that was. He felt, 
in his instinctive, unreflecting way, that it 
would be a happiness to fall down upon it 
and die, so unutterably wretched was he. 
The feeling actuating him was as the longing 
of a child for the mother's breast, the ardent, 
soul-quelling desire of a lover to gain the side 
of an absent mistress ; the yearning of the 
mariner on a desert island for the home he 
will never see again. As I have said, he did 
not reflect upon his longing; he would not 
then have been a child of eight years. It was 
instinct, and all the more invincible. 

When the Rectory was full of visitors he 
shrank into his bedroom, and there re- 
mained in cold and darkness till Mrs. Cope 
came to search for him and send him to bed. 



flOME-SICE. 81 

Yet, even in these depths of misery there 
were chords in his nature which could be 
touched, and excite a momentary diversion 
from his brooding over the past. One 
night there was a lady visiting at the 
house who played skilfully on the .piano. As 
Arthur sat in his dark hiding-plSce, the 
drawing-room door happened to be opened 
whilst this lady was playing. The sweet 
notes fell upon his ear with an effect that 
nothing else could have produced. A fine 
spark of heavenly fire, which lay beneath all 
the rude externals of his being, throbbed 
momentarily into brighter life at the voice of 
the keys. The next moment the door was 
shut again, and the music became indistin- 
guishable. But he could not resist the 
impulse to hear more. Stealing out of the 
bedroom, he crept down stairs on tip-toe. 
The hall was vacant. He approached the 
drawing-room door and stood with his ear 
against it, drinking in the melody in brief 
forgetfulness of his troubles. In a few 
moments he fancied he heard a step descend- 
ing the upper stairs. Dreading to be found 
here, he rushed to the house-door, and out 
into the niglit. The ground was frozen liard, 
and light snow was just beginning to falL 
Guided still by his ear, ho made his way over 
some barren flower-beds to beneath the draw- 
ing-room windows. The niglit was so per- 
fectly still that he heard the music here 
VOL. I. G 



82 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

almost as well as within the house. Crouch- 
ing on the fresh-fallen snow, he listened, all 
unconscious of the cold, till the music 
ceased. 

Perhaps it might commence again. In 
hope of this he waited, waited till the snow 
had quite covered him with white flakes, till 
his teeth chattered and his hands and feet 
were numb. Then he re-entered the house 
and crept silently up-stairs. 

He had opened the bedroom door before he 
observed that there was a light within, and 
on entering he found himself face to face 
with Mrs. Cope. The good lady was horri- 
fied ; she scolded severely, she even threat- 
ened corporal punishment. Arthur said not 
a word, but allowed himself to be hurried 
into bed. Then, when Mrs. Cope had gone 
and he was alone in the dark, he burst into 
passionate weeping, and so at length sobbed 
himself to sleep. 

Early on the following morning, just after 
the servants had risen and had opened the 
door, a little, shivering form crept silently 
down stairs, paused a moment in the hall to 
see that no one was about, then ran quickly 
into the garden. Thence it passed into a 
field, and, crossing this, entered the high 
road. 

It was Arthur. Possibly he had come out 
ior a walk before breakfast; his constant 
desire of solitude would account for his steal- 



HOME-SIOK. 855 ' 

iDg from the house so quietly. But why had 
he forgotten to put on his little overcoat ? 
It had ceased snowing some time during the 
night, and frost had since made the surface 
hard ; but the sky looked leaden and lower- 
ing in the early daylight ; it would snow again 
^re long. The cold was piercing, and the 
wind, which ever and again swept the fields, 
froze everything that it touched. Surely it 
was a strange morning to take an early walk, 
without an overcoat too. 

A country fellow happened to be coming 
along the road just as Arthur emerged into 
it. The boy stopped him and inquired his 
way to a certain village distant about two 
miles. Having received the direction he set 
off running. Had he been given a com- 
mission from the rector that he showed such 
eagerness to reach the place ? Mr. Norman 
had occasionally sent him on little errands in 
the hope of affording him distraction. But 
this was too great a distance, and before 
breakfast. 

In something more than an hour he reached 
the village, and, choosing a retired spot, sat 
down to rest for a few moments. He was 
very tired, and, despite the severity of the 
morning, the perspiration stood on his fore- 
head, he had run so quickly. 

In a short time he rose again, and again 
inquired of a passer-by the way to another 
village, still farther off. The man looked at 



84 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

Ms questioner in some surprise, but gave him 
the desired information. Once away from 
the houses the boy began again to run, look- 
ing from time to time behind him, as if 
afraid of pursuers. For nearly three hours^ 
he toiled along, wearied at length beyond 
running, and indeed scarcely able to walk. 
He began to feel very hungry, too. Why 
did he not turn back towards Bloomford^ 
where food and shelter and friendly facea 
awaited him ? He seemed to have no such 
thought. 

Before one or two cottages, which he 
passed, he made a pause. His hunger had 
grown so severe that he was on the point of 
knocking at the door and begging for a little 
food, but each time his courage failed him, 
and he passed on. He felt dreadfully thirsty, 
too, and, to relieve himself, broke off lumps 
of hard snow from the ground, and let 
them melt in his mouth. So great was his 
weariness now that he could scarcely trail 
his limbs along. He was, be it remembered, 
only eight years old, and weak besides, and 
he must have travelled nearly eight miles. 
Again and again he sat down to rest, now on 
the snow-covered bank at the roadside, now 
on a stile w^hich led off the road into fields, 
and each time he rose it was with a feelinor 
that he could go no further. He did not 
give way to despair and cry ; but his eyes 
were bloodshot from the cuttiug wind, his 




HOME-SICE. 85 

<5lieeks were pale and haggard-looking, his 
limbs trembled wtih cold and fatigue. For 
he was no longer able to walk quick enough 
to keep himself warm. He felt as though 
sensation was quitting all his limbs. 

The noon was past, and not a ray of sun- 
shine had yet illumined the dreary tracts of 
snow-clad country. Neither had it as yet 
snowed ; but now every moment the welkin 
grew more leaden, and the wind whistled 
along the scraggy hedge-rows with an omi- 
nous note. At length a few white specks 
began to appear against the gathering gloom 
of the sky, then Arthur felt something blow 
velvety soft against his face, and before long 
it began to snow in earnest. No house was 
now within sight, and as he felt his feet sink 
and clog in the fast deepening drifts, the 
piercing wind seemed to the child to freeze 
his very heart; cold despair had bound the 
very source of tears, but, though he could 
not cry, for a moment he wished that he were 
back at the Eectory. Unable to toil a yard 
further he staggered to the road-side, and 
sunk down to rest. 

He felt sleepy ; not even the falling snow 
was able to keep him awake; and he knew 
that by degrees he fell into a reclining 
posture. He did not do so purposely, it 
seemed that he could not help it. And he 
felt far from uncomfortable. The sensation 
of deadening cold had departed, and a 



86 WOEKBRS IN THE DAWN. 

pleasant warmtli wrapped his limbs. In a 
few moments he seemed to dream. A dark 
object bent over him, and raised his cap from 
his face, and then it seemed as if he were 
raised to a great height by a force which he 
could not resist ; but still his sensation of 
comfort was not disturbed. Then he seemed 
to be moving through the air, still over- 
shadowed by the dark object. Then, for a 
time, he ceased to dream, and dark weari- 
ness bound all his senses. But this passed as 
the dream renewed itself. Again the delight- 
ful enjoyment of warmth, but this time there 
seemed to be light as well, and a low sound, 
as of voices, g:rew upon his ear. The light 
grew more intense ; he once more felt the 
ability to stir, and, rousing himself with an 
effort, found that it had not been all a dream. 
He was sitting in a large easy-chair, before 
him cracked and blazed an immense fire, and 
around him stood a group of people. One, 
an elderly woman, was chafing his hands, 
and behind her stood a man with a glass of 
something in his hand that steamed and 
smelt deliciously. The rest were children, 
staring at him in silence. 

The woman spoke to him in a kindly voice, 
asking if he felt better, and, on his replying 
in the affirmative, began to question him as 
to the reason of his wandering alone on such 
a stormy evening. It appeared that her 
husband, coming home along the high road^ 



HOME-SICK. 87 

» 

had seen Arthur half asleep, half fainting, in 
the snow, had picked him up in his arms, and 
carried him to his house, which was not a 
quarter of a mile off. 

In answer to their inquiries Arthur had 
but one reply : He was going to London. 
Had he friends in London ? He said, yes. 
He made no attempt to explain his journey, 
maintaining: stolid silence in answer to all 
other questions regarding it. And how did 
he intend getting to London ? He didn't 
know ; he was going to walk ; but just now he 
felt so hungry. 

They set some food before him, and by 
degrees he satisfied his hunger. Then, when 
he had eaten and drank enough, the woman, 
after a brief discussion apart with her husband, 
bade him follow her upstairs. Here he was 
helped to take his clothes off, and was put to 
bed. 

He slept all night without a dream. When 
he awoke there were two children dressing in 
the room by the dim light which came througli 
the small casement. Arthur could see that 
it was still snowing. Without speaking a 
word he jumped out of bed and commenced 
putting on his clothes, the other children all 
the time eyeing him curiously. 

He descended the stairs, and found the 
husband and wife seated at breakfast before 
a large fire. The room was a large kitchen, 
the floor beautifully clean, the walls garnished 



88 WOEKEUS IN THE DAWN. 

with pewter and crockery, everything be- 
tokening order and comfort. 

" Eh ! Here's this poor child up already ! " 
exclaimed the woman in surprise. "How do 
you feel this morning ? '* 

Arthur replied that he felt hungry. 

" Why, that's right ! " exclaimed the man, 
in a hearty tone, laughing as he spoke. 
" There ain't so much amiss with a lad when 
he says he's hungry. Come and warm your- 
self, boy." 

Arthur complied gladly, and in a few 
minutes was partaking of a hearty breakfast. 
When he had finished, the woman looked 
curiously at him for some minutes, and then 
said — 

" And so you want to get to London, do 
you ? You're a young un to be travelling 
about by yourself in weather like this, and I 
can't quite make you out. But if you've got 
friends in London and nowhere else, why to 
London you must go, that's the long and 
short of it. Do you know how far it is, 
lad ? " 

Arthur shook his head. 

** Well, hard upon forty miles. Do you 
think you can walk that to-day ? " 

" I can try," replied the boy, simply. 

The man and woman burst out laughing. 

" Well, I can't make it out at all," said the 
former, once more. '* But I hope there's 
nothing wrong. Now look — I'm going to 



N 



HOME-SICK. 89 

take you up to the railway station here, and 
get you a ticket for London. If you once 
get there, do you think you can find your 
friends ? '* 

The boy replied that he was sure he could. 

** Very good. Then as soon as you're 
ready we'll be off, for I haven't much time to 
spare." 

In the meantime the woman had cut 
several mightily substantial sandwiches, 
which she now wrapped in a piece of paper 
and put into Arthur's hand, bidding him eat 
them during the journey. The man having 
encased himself in a huge overcoat, then took 
Arthur by the hand and led him out of the 
house. The boy had already been provided 
by the kindly dame with a thick muffler 
which belonged to one of her own children, 
and thus he suffered less when he met the 
morning wind. The woman and children 
stood at the door watching him till he had 
turned a corner and was out of sight. 

The man was as good as his word. He 
purchased a third-class ticket, which he bade 
Arthur be careful not to lose ; and, having 
seen him safely seated in the train, which 
steamed into the station thickly draped with 
snow, he gave him a few coppers and hearty 
wishes, and waved his hand to him as the 
train moved quickly away. Truly he had 
been a good Samaritan. 

In a couple of hours Arthur once more 



90 WORKKES IN THE DAWN. 

stood in London — confused by the rapid 
events of the morning, hustled by the thick 
crowd upon" the platform, not knowing 
where to turn or what to do. He made his 
way into the open street. Here it was not 
snowing, but evidently had been a very short 
time ago, and the pavement was thick with 
slush. The child's heart sank within him as 
he stood close up to the wall to be out of the 
way of the hurrying crowds, grasping in one 
hand the remnant of his sandwiches, in the 
other the few coppers that he had received as 
a parting gift from his kindly host. Whither 
should he now turn his steps ? 

The hesitation and the fear were only for a 
few moments. After all, he was in London, in 
the midst of all the rush and roar with which 
he was so familiar, which had gone on around 
him ever since he could recollect. Compared 
with fche monotonous quiet of Bloomford this 
was indeed home, and as the words rose to 
his lips a flush of hope warmed his veins ; he 
began to walk quickly along the sloppy 
streets. 

Once or twice he inquired his way — the 
way to Whitecross Street; for it was to the 
house where he had last of all lived that he 
bent his steps— to the house and the room 
where he had seen his father last. Of friends 
to whom he could go and beg shelter he had 
literally none. The landlady of his latest 
abode was his only acquaintance. 



•v 



HOHE-SICK. 91 

About noon he reached Whitecross Streets 
Very foul did its hideous face peep forth from 
the covering of slush and grime and all un- 
utterable abominations; but to Arthur it 
meant home, and he hailed its appearance. 
He reached the entrance of the court, he ran 
quickly to the house-door. There stood the 
landlady, in her hands a jug of beer, which 
she had just fetched for her dinner. She 
opened her eyes in astonishment. 

" Eh, I'm damn'd if that 'ere kid ain't 
come back again ! S'elp me Grod ! " 

" How do you do, Mrs. Blatherwick ?" said 
Arthur, smiling. 

" How do I do, young un ? Why, what 
are you a doin' 'ere, I'd like to know ?" 

Arthur scarcely knew what to say. The 
coarse, unfriendly tone of the woman had 
checked the words he was about to utter, and 
he stood looking down in silence. 

" Is our old room let yet, Mrs. Blather- 
wick ? " he at length plucked up courage to 
ask. 

" And what d'yer want to know for, eh ?" 
replied the woman. 

" Because, if it isn't," stammered the boy, 
^* I wish you'd let me sleep there to-night. I 
haven't anywhere else to go to." 

" Ain't got nowhere else to go to ?" echoed 
Mrs. Blatherwick in surprise. " Why, I 
thought as you'd gone to live with the par- 
son P' 



92 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" I — Fve left him/' said Arthur, timidly. 

'* Oh, you've left him, 'ev yer ? Then yer 
may jist go an get a lodgin' of them as'll 
give it yer." 

She was on the point of turning away into 
the house when a sudden thought appeared 
to strike her, and she stopped. 

** How much money have yer got in yer 
pockets, eh ?" she asked, her vicious-looking 
eyes sparkling the while. 

"I've got fourpence," replied Arthur, 
showing the coppers. " Will you let me have 
a night's lodging for fourpence, Mrs. Blather- 
wick ?" 

The landlady reflected a moment, and the 
result seemed favourable. 

" Come in with yer," she said. " Yer 
don't expect to 'ave no dinner, do yer?" 

" I've got all I want," replied Arthur, 
showing his sandwiches. 

" Come along, then," snarled the woman. 
^' Don't keep me standin' 'ere all day." 

And she preceded him into the house, taking 
a draught out of the jug as she went. 




CHAPTER V. 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 



Aethur followed Mrs. Blatherwick down dark 
and damp stairs into a cellar-kitchen, where 
the principal light was that emitted by a large 
fire. On the fire was a frying-pan, in which 
was at that moment hissing and spluttering 
a goodly beef-steak, the odour of which filled 
the kitchen and made poor Arthur's mouth 
water. Otherwise it was a vile place, reeking 
with moisture, foul with indescribable filth, 
the ceiling black with the smoke of hundreds 
of fires, the floor marked here and there with 
the corpse of a crushed black-beetle. On a 
wooden table, drawn np to the fire, stood the 
preparations for the good lady's mid-day 
meal, and to that, having discovered that the 
steak was just done, Mrs. Blatherwick ac- 
cordingly addressed herself. Arthur sat on a 
broken chair, meanwhile, eyeing the woman 
with hungry eyes, and doing his best to satisfy 
his own stomach with the scraps of dry bread 
and meat which remained to him. 

Whilst she was in the midst of her meal a 
step was heard descendingthestairs, a heavy, 
reeling, uncertain step. A moment after a 
man entered. He looked about twenty-two 




94 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

or twenty-three. His face was that of a hope- 
less sot, a flabby, meaningless, bestial face, 
which only on occasions was enlivened by a 
twinkle of evil in one of the dull, fishy eyes. 
He was very tall, and his body seemed to be 
insecurely jointed ; when he staggered across 
the kitchen and dropped himself into a chair, 
it seemed as though the shock would dislo- 
cate his limbs. Arthur knew this individual ; 
it was Mrs. Blatherwick's eldest son, by name 
Bill. 

Bill was not at present more drunk than 
usual, though a casual observer would cer- 
tainly have concluded that he had been in- 
dulging past his wont. He had so soaked 
himself with brutalising liquors ever since he 
had been able to raise a can to his mouth, 
that the present state of bodily laxity and 
mental obfuscation was normal to him. As 
he sat gazing with half-opened eyes at Arthur, 
apparently not quite able to recall his iden- 
tity, his mother commenced to abuse him on 
the score of his idleness and drunkenness. 

A conversation ensued which I shall not 
endeavour to repeat, under fear of being stig- 
matised as a "realist" by the critical world. 

Arthur took no special heed of it. Alas ! 
his ears were but too well accustomed to 
sounds such as these. He was, moreover, so 
weary with his journey that, under the in- 
fluence of the flre, he sank to sleep in his 
chair* 



. PfiOFESSIONAL LTlJ'E. 95 

When he awoke daylight had long since 
passed away. The fire blazed more cheer- 
fully than ever, and, with the assistance of a 
tallow dip standing on the table, effectually 
lighted up the room. Bill Blatherwick had 
disappeared, most probably had long since 
assumed his wonted corner in the " Rose and 
Crown ; " but his mother was at present busy 
in preparing a cup of tea. 

" Are y' 'ungry ?" she snarled at Arthur, 
as soon as his moving proclaimed him 
awake. 

He replied in the affirmative, and received 
a hunch of very stale bread. 

" If ye're thirsty, there's the tap," added 
the woman, pointing to a foul corner of the 
kitchen, where at intervals spots of water 
dripped from a tap on to a stone slab. 

Arthur walked to it, held his hands cup- 
like, to receive the water, and quenched his 
thirst. 

In the meantime Mrs. Blatherwick poured 
out for herself a cup of strong tea, and 
■assumed a seat in the full glow of the fire. 

"Well, young un," she began sharply, 
after a few minutes' thought, " what are you 
<;ome back 'ere for, eh ?" 

The suddenness and fierce tone of the ques- 
tion seemed all at once to bring, for the first 
time, the full sense of his position before the 
child's mind. Casting a glance of helpless 
pleading, first at the woman, then round the 



96 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

bare walls of the cellar, he suddenly burst 
into tears. 

" Where have thej buried my father?" he- 
sobbed out, after giving full vent for a 
minute to the distress which overmastered 
him. " Will you please to tell me, Mrs. 
Blatherwick ?" 

"How the devil should I know ?" replied 
the woman, with a croaking laugh. " Is 
that all ye're 'ere for — to arst questens like 
that?" 

There was silence for a moment; then Mrs. 
Blatherwick resumed. 

** Where 'ev yer been livin' ?" 

" I — I don't know," sobbed Arthur. 

"Well, how did yer get back 'ere? Yer 
know that, I s'pose ? " 

The boy recounted his adventures between 
Bloomford and London. As he concluded, 
Mrs. Blatherwick shrugged her shoulders. 

" Well," she said, " if ye stay 'ere to-night 
yer'U 'ev to pay, as I s'pose yer know." 

Arthur thrust his hand eagerly into his 
pocket and drew out the few coppers his un- 
known friend had given him. 

Mrs. Blatherwick appropriated them with- 
out hesitation. • 

" An' what are yer goin' to do for a livin', 
eh?" she then asked. 

" I'm sure I don't know," replied Arthur, 
still sobbing. " Could you lielp me to find 
something, Mrs. Blatherwick ? " 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 97 

** Maybe I could," said the woman. " I've 
got somethink i' my 'ead, but I doubt it's too 
good for yer." 

"Do you think so, Mrs. Blatherwick? 
What is it ? " 

" No, no ; it's too good for yer." 

" Please tell me what it is, Mrs. Blather- 
wick. I'd try my best." 

" Yer would, eh ? " 

" Fm sure I would." 

" What d'yer say, then, to go round singin* 
with Bill ? Now didn't I say as it was too 
. good for yer? Yer couldn't sing well enough, 
could yer, now ? " 

" I — I'd try my best, Mrs. Blatherwick," 
stammered Arthur. " I think I could if 
someone told me how." 

" Yer do, eh ? " 

" Yes, Mrs. Blatherwick. Might I live 
here if I did that ?" 

" I don't know but yer might, if ye did 
well." 

" In father s room, Mrs. Blatherwick ?" 
asked the boy, eagerly. 

" Fr'aps." 

" Oh, I'm sure I could do it, if only some- 
one would show me how," ..cried Arthur,, 
drawing his chair nearer to the woman. 

"Then I'll learn yer," replied Mrs. 
Blatherwick, taking a draught of her tea. 
" I'll say the words first, an' then you say 

VOL. J. H 



98 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

'em arf ter ; an' when yer know the words, 
I'll learn yer the tune." 

The lesson began. It was a somewhat 
singular picture, that of the old hag on one 
side of the fire, her repulsive features lit up 
by its blaze, her hand beating time upon her 
knee, as she recited the words in a sing-song 
tone which showed clearly that she had no 
understanding of their meaning ; opposite to 
her the handsome-faced boy, neatly dressed, 
with his light hair waving over his temples 
and shining like gold in the blaze from the 
grate, his lips parted in his eagerness to learn 
the words of the song — or, as it seemed, 
hymn — and his blue eyes still glistening with 
the moisture of recent tears. The words 
recited were these : — 

Behold the lilies of the field, 

Thej toil not, neither spin, 
Bnt yet onr Father gives to them 

The raiment they stand in. 

Behold the little birds in air. 

They care not for the morrow. 
And yet oxu Heavenly Father sees 

They have no need to borrow. 

So we will trust to God above. 

For we are better far 
Than lilies and than sparrows both ; 

For His children we are. 

Arthur's quick memory had soon caught 
up the rhythm of these beautiful lines, 
greatly to Mrs. Blatherwick's astonishment ; 
whereupon the latter proceeded to chant them 
to their appropriate melody, bidding Arthur 




PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 99 

pay good heed and learn the air. The air 
was lugubrious in the extreme, just fitted for 
teing sung by a sturdy mendicant of the 
streets, and it lost nothing in effect when 
rendered by the now croaking, now whining, 
now snarling falsetto of Mrs. Blatherwick. 
So she began : — 

Be — *old — thee — lee — lees — hof — thee — field. 
They — tile — not — nei — ther — spin j 

and at the end of each verse Arthur took up 
the strain and did his best to imitate the 
whining nasality which his instructress ex- 
hibited in such perfection. It was not to be 
expected that he should all at once reach the 
summits of his new art, but he did so far 
well as to earn Mrs. Blatherwick's approba- 
tion. By about nine o'clock he had thoroughly 
learnt both words and air. Accordingly his 
landlady gave him leave to ascend to the 
garret in which he had formerly lived with 
his father, and there to remain for the rest of 
the night. 

This room had not been occupied since 
poor Golding had left it in his coffin, and now 
contained neither more nor less furniture 
than on the night of his death. Somehow or 
other the pieces of brown paper supplying 
the places of the broken panes of glass had 
got torn off, and the wind blew into the room 
with chilling breath. Despite all this dis- 
comfort, poor Arthur heaved a sigh of relief 



100 WOEKBES IN THE DAWN. 

as he entered the door. Having done his best 
to make it fast behind him, by drawing with 
difficulty a very rusty bolt, he ran with a low 
cry to the comer in which his father had 
lain when last he saw him, and flinging him- 
self on the spot, wept aloud in the bitterness 
of his heart. Outside it was raining hard, 
and each fierce gust of wind swept large drops 
through the gaps in the windows, making the 
floor quite wet. The room would have been 
perfectly dark, save for a slight gleam which 
shone from a window directly opposite, where 
there was no blind to conceal the bright fire 
and the oil lamp by which two women were 
sitting at their needles. The child did not 
notice the darkness; it was nothing to him, 
for the terrible gloom within his heart would 
have made the lightest chamber seem black 
as midnight. For half an hour he lay upon 
the floor, a prey to anguish such as few grown 
men are capable of experiencing. 

He was roused from a species of lethargy 
at length by the sound of ten o'clock pealing 
from a church hard by. Feeling tired, he 
took off his coat, rolled it up to form a pillow, 
and lay down with the intention of sleeping. 
But it was long before he succeeded in attain- 
ing that happy oblivion. The noises outside 
attracted his attention irresistibly; he en- 
deavoured to separate the different elements 
out of the mingled sounds which made them- 
selves heard amid the wind and rain. 



PEOFESSIONAL LIFR. 101 

Presently the latter ceased, and surprised 
\)j a raj of strange light which suddenly 
streamed through the window and made a 
large white square upon the floor, he looked 
up and saw that the full moon was struggling 
for life amid surging billows of clouds. 
Shortly ensued noises in the room below his ; 
there were angry voices, followed by blows 
and the smashing of crockery. It was 
nothing new, he was aware of the quarrel- 
some habits of the people underneath. Then 
the court grew suddenly lively with a gather- 
ing of children, who had eagerly escaped 
from the houses on the cessation of the rain. 
No matter that it was drawing on towards 
midnight, there were the voices of children 
four or five years old, screaming and calling 
as if it were noonday; for the wholesome 
division of time made for the children of the 
rich is all unknown to these nurselings of 
Whitecross Street. They seemed at length 
to be joining in a game, which consisted 
partly in going round and round in a circle, 
chanting a song the while. Arthur knew the 
game and the song well enough ; the latter 
began with the words : — 

There is a happy land, far, far away ; 

and as he listened to the shrill chorus of 
young voices he found himself unconsciously 
joining with them. And so at length, blend- 
ing the words of this song with those of the 



102 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

hymn which Mrs. Blatherwick had just 
taught him, he was overcome with weariness 
and fell asleep. 

It wanted three days to Christmas ; ac- 
cordingly no time was to be lost in making 
the most of that spasmodic spirit of charity 
which appears to possess certain people afc 
this period of the year. Mrs. Blatherwick 
roused Arthur from his slumbers about seven 
the next morning, and bade him get up 
quickly. . He was not, however, to continue 
to wear the clothes in which Mr. Norman 
had clad him ; instead of these the landlady 
made him assume a pair of trousers and a 
coat so ragged and filthy that they would 
scarcely hold together, and were absolutely 
no protection against the cold. The other 
clothes Mrs. Blatherwick took away with 
her ; doubtless she had an object in so doing. 

Though roused so early it was not till 
shortly after nine o'clock that Bill Blather- 
wick issued forth upon his day's work, ac- 
companied by the shivering and wretched 
child. Bill's scene of action lay for the most 
part in the wealthier neighbourhood of the 
West End, and the charitable persons who 
ministered to his support were not in the 
habit of rising with the lark. Arthur had 
never as yet seen Bill in professional costume^^ 
and the appearance of the latter slightly 
surprised him. The mendicant wore his 
ordinary garments, for it would have been 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 103 

impossible to find worse, but over each eye 
lie had tied a large green shade, the pair 
being not unlike the blinkers of horses, which 
signified that he had sustained the irreparable 
misfortune of loss of eyesight. He had, 
moreover, all at once become one-armed, the 
left being so skilfully disposed that nothing 
but a close examination could have shown 
that it was not in reality amputated. On 
his head was a chimney-pot hat, terribly 
battered, around which was wrapped a piece of 
white cardboard, bearing these words, half in 
written, half in printed, characters : — 

'' Christien Frends ! 
Pray concider a widood Father 
The victim of a Bxplogion 
And may Grod bless you." 

In his right hand he held a stick, and he 
directed Arthur to guide him by the empty 
sleeve on the other side. In this manner 
they issued out of Whitecross Street and pro- 
ceeded westwards. 

The morning was dry and cold, and before 
long large flakes of snow began to fall. Bill 
was rather glad of this than otherwise; it 
enhanced the pathos of the situation, and 
abundant were the coppers thrown down 
from windows for the relief of the blind 
widower and his motherless boy. Truly it 
was not without cause that the mendicant 
whined out his trust that in proportion as he 



104 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

excelled in moral worth the lilies of the field 
and the birds of the air, a kindly Providence 
would take thought for his future sustenance. 
It was a bad street indeed which did not 
produce three pennies, and when it is taken 
into consideration that Bill did^ as a rule, 
thirty streets a day, there will no longer be 
wonder as to how he procured the means 
of spending such pleasant evenings at the 
"Rose and Crown." The severity of the 
weather was nothing to hira, for underneath 
his miserable outward clothing he always 
took care to have good warm shirts where- 
with to ward off the onslaughts of the north- 
east wind. But poor Arthur possessed no 
such means of comfort, and the suffering he 
underwent was indeed cruel. For all the 
protection that his rags afforded him he 
might as well have been naked, every blast 
which swept along the white-lined streets 
sent a shower of snow-flakes through the 
interstices of his garments on to his very skin. 
The first hour of his torture suflficed to render 
his hands and feet numb beyond perception 
of pain, which was perhaps a blessing ; but 
the other parts of his body were kept in 
constant suffering from other sources than 
the cold. For Bill, who was as rank a bully 
and coward as ever sang hymns to procure 
the wherewithal for a glass of gin, found a 
constant source of amusement in secretly 
torturing the poor boy. One moment he 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 105 

would unexpectedly pinch his arm till his 
nails almost met in the flesh ; or, when he 
thought himself secure from observation, he 
would deal him a severe blow with the stick 
he held in his hand, hissing terrific threats 
in his ear when a cry of pain burst from the 
sufferer's lips ; or he would purposely tread 
with his heavy-soled boots upon the boy's 
almost bare feet ; in short he was inex- 
haustible in the discovery of exquisite tortures, 
grinning with delight as he saw them take 
effect to the full extent of his wishes. When 
at noon he retreated into a miserable den 
in the regions of Holborn, where he was well 
known, and there partook of a very substan- 
tial meal, he took a fierce delight in eyeing 
from beneath his raised blinkers the hungry 
glances of the boy, who, with pinched lips 
and hollow cheeks, sat gazing with wolfish 
eagerness at the fare which he was forbidden 
to touch. When Bill had finished his meal, 
Arthur received a dry crust, which he seized 
upon thankfully, and gnawed as they once 
more took their way through the driving 
enow. He felt as though it would have re- 
lieved him to have cried, but the very source 
of tears seemed frozen within him. 

With the falling night they turned their 
steps homewards, and another piece of dry 
bread, together with a steaming cup of what 
it pleased Mrs. Blatherwick to style coffee^ 
formed Arthur's supper, after which he was 



106 WOEKEBS IS THE DAWN. 

bidden to betake himself once more to the 
garret, where he found a mattress and one or 
two old blankets — signs of his landlady's 
growing consideration. In the morning once- 
more began his sufferings. 

At length it was Christmas Eve, — an oc- 
casion celebrated in Whitecross Street just as 
much as in the homes of wealth and refine- 
ment. With dusk the revels began, and, 
till the hour of closing, the public-houses 
swarmed with men, women, and children 
doing their best to welcome with due re- 
joicing the birthday of Christianity. Far be it 
from me to emulate the skill of those number- 
less holy men who have exhausted their in- 
ventions in describing those regions which 
are to be the future home of no inconsider- 
able portion of the human race ; but, had I a 
tithe of their descriptive power, 0, what a 
hell could I depict in the Whitecross Street 
of this Christmas Eve! Out of the very 
depths of human depravity bubbled up the 
foulest miasmata which the rottenness of the- 
human heart can breed, usurping the dominion 
of the pure air of heaven, stifling a whole 
city with their infernal reek. 

The very curs that had followed their 
masters into the gin-palaces shrank out into 
the street again, affrighted by the brutal din. 
Here was a dense, surging crowd around the 
doors of such a house, surrounding two men 
who had been flung bodily forth by half a^ 



\ 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 107 

dozen policemen, and who now wallowed in 
the filth of the gutter, rending each other 
with tooth and nail, till one of them was 
carried off insensible or dead. Here rushed 
along the street a band of women, raving mad 
with drink and the passions it had aroused, 
rendering the gift of speech a hideous curse 
by the language they yelled aloud. Here 
were children, all but naked, wrangling and 
fighting for the possession of a jug of liquor 
which they had somehow procured. And, 
amid all, the shops and booths, ablaze with 
light, were doing the briskest trade of any 
day of the year. Here was poverty cheating 
poverty of its last pence ; here was garbage 
«old for meat and poison for bread ; from 
every hole and corner of the street and its 
foul allies peered vice and crime. Nay, as 
the newspapers will shortly tell us, even 
murder was not absent from this Christmas 
Eve. Walk here with me hand-in-hand, O 
cynic, thou who holdest that the roots of 
humanity spring from the seed of evil, walk 
here with me, and, if thou wilt, declare thy 
belief confirmed. 

Christmas Eve ! There are midnight ser- 
vices to-night in London churches, and voices 
are lifted up in hymn and praise, glorification 
of God that he has sent His Son to proclaim 
peace on earth and goodwill to men, to be 
the herald of a time when universal love shall 
rule the earth. In the great houses of the 



108 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

West End — those from which rained the 
coppers which Bill Blatherwick was at pre- 
sent spending at the " Rose and Crown/' the 
very heart of the hell I have described — in 
these houses there are Christmas trees to- 
night, and gaily-dressed children sport 
beneath the flash of the magnificent chan- 
deliers, half mad with the enjoyment of the 
merriest night of the year. What if Bill 
Blatherwick himself, bestially drunk as he 
now is, were to be transported bodily into 
one of these mansions and then thrown 
down upon the carpet — a novel excite- 
ment for these Christmas guests ! Would 
it strike any of them, with tbe terrific force 
of a Grod-sent revelation, that to them in- 
dividually was due a share of the evil which 
has bred such an utterable abomination ? 
Alas ! Whitecross Street is very far off in 
that shocking Bast End which it is quite im- 
proper to think of, let alone visit, and there 
is but little possibility that its reek, powerful 
as it is, would pierce these stone walls and 
make itself felt above the perfumes which 
fill the dazzling chambers. 

And in all this Arthur Goldiug bore his 
part. Mrs. Blatherwick, having got completely 
drunk long before dark, was quite extrava- 
gant in her benevolence to him. She even 
gave him the pot out of which she was drink- 
ing "four-half" from the nearest public- 
house, and bade him, with a curse, drink as 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. 109 

much as he would. He did so, and, shortly 
after, finding himself unnoticed by the people 
who streamed in and out of the house, wan- 
dered into the streets and looked about him. 
He had no playmates here, and was perforce 
alone, for the boisterousness of the children 
terrified him, and an instinctive delicacy made 
him shrink from their rude games. 

Intent upon the varied scenes surrounding 
him he wandered out of Whitecross Street 
into the larger streets beyond, pausing at 
each large shop he passed, and doing his best 
to imagine that the lights warmed him. The 
grocers' shops particularly attracted his 
attention, laid out in all the magnificence of 
Christmas provisions, and his eyes gloated 
over what seemed to him the priceless 
delicacies wliich flashed and glistened in the 
light of the gas-jets. 

Before one shop in particular he stood a 
long while, gazing at a vast array of cry- 
stallised fruits which filled the window. He 
could imagine, though he had never tasted, 
the delicious sweetness of these fruits, and, 
all insensible to the fierce blasts which were 
cutting him to the very bone, he enjoyed in 
fancy such feasts as only the Prophet's faith- 
ful in Paradise would be capable of realisincr. 
Tearing himself from these delights he came 
to an eating-house, and here, instead of 
a sweet, enjoyed in fancy a savoury repast. 
The window was filled with large beef-steak 



110 WOREEBS IN THE DAWN. 

pies, placed on perforated tin, from beneath 
which issued clouds of steam and kept the pies 
warm. Now and again a brawny arm, bared 
to the elbow, would appear through the 
steam, and with a great knife, would pierce 
into one of these succulent delicacies, causing 
such streams of gravy to flow, and exposing 
to the view such luscious gobbets of fat, that 
n cry of envious pleasure broke from the 
child's hungry lips. 

Not Schecabac at the Barmecide's table, 
not Sancho Panza, when Dr. Rizio seemed to 
bid fair to starve him in his island, ever 
suffered so from the tortures of stimulated 
but unsatisfied appetite as did poor little 
Arthur in front of these shops. And when 
shortly after he came to one where a whole 
roast pig was exposed to view, dressed in 
such a manner as to suggest delights which 
only Charles Lamb could fitly celebrate, the 
ravenous boy felt he could have pounced upon 
it like a beast of prey and torn it limb from 
limb in the ferocity of his hunger. 

He had strayed as far as the corner of Old 
Street and City Road, when his eye was 
caught by the glow of a little fire which marked 
the spot where a baked-potato man had his 
stand. The man was doing a brisk trade 
just now, and Arthur was tempted to join the 
small group which stood around him and 
timidly held out his hands towards the 



PROFESSIONAL LIFE. Ill 

warmth of the fire. This was grateful to his 
half-frozen limbs, but even more so was the 
delightful odour which exhaled as often as 
the man opened the little iron door and took 
out a potato to hand to a customer. 

Oh, could he but afford a baked potato ! 
He well knew the price of them was one half- 
penny, and yet they were as much out of his 
reach as if they had cost a pound. With 
greedy eyes he followed the man's every 
movement, saw him, as each customer 
advanced, draw out a brown- jacket, open it, 
and sprinkle on the inside salt and pepper. 
Then he watched the purchaser taking the 
first bite as he walked away, and was half 
persuaded to spring upon him like a young 
tiger and rend the food from his grasp. 

Again and again he walked away, and as 
often returned. The potato-man had not 
been unobservant of his comings and goings ; 
once or twice he had been on the point of 
bidding him be off, but he was not a hasty- 
tempered man, and something in the boy's 
face forbade harshness. At length, when 
no customer was by, and Arthur had been 
standing for several minutes warming him- 
self, the man suddenly inquired — 

'' What for you, my man ? " 

Arthur started and turned to hurry away, 
but the man called him back. 

" Her^, young un, don't look so scared. 



112 WOBKEBS IN THE DAYW. 

Give us your 'arf penny, an' 'ere's a big un for 
you/' 

Arthur stammered that he had not a half- 
penny. 

•* Ain't got a /arf penny ? D'yer mean to 
say you'vei spent all your earnins' already ? '* 

*' They never give me anything to spend/ *^ 
replied the boy. 

*' Yer look 'angry," said the man, after look- 
ing at him for a moment. 

" I'm very hungry," was all that Arthur 
could re ply. 

" Hum ! I thought as much. Maybe you 
could eat a tater ? " 

*' That I could," said the hungry boy. 

The man took out a large flowery potato 
and broke it open. 

" D'yer like pepper, young un ?" 

^* Yes, please." 

" And salt ? — of course you does. 'Ere 
goes. Now let's see if yer know how to eat." 

Arthur seized the potato with almost 
savage eagerness, and devoured it, steaming 
hot as it was. He was then going off, after 
thanking his friend, but the latter put 
another potato in his hands and bade him 
eat it on his way home. He seemed to 
have a certain pleasure in the boy's look of 
gratitude. 

"Well, well,it's Christ mas Eve," he muttered 
to himself as he watched Arthur walk away ; 



PROFESSIONAL UFE. 113 

** and a penny ain't so much arter all. Poor 
little devil ! '' 

And if every man in London had been as 
judiciously charitable that night as was the 
baked-potato man, the Christmas Day which 
followed would have been rich with a 
blossoming of unwonted happiness. 



VOL. T. 



CHAPTER VI. 



childhood's happy houbs. 



Fain would Arthur have visited the friendly 
comer again on the following night, but deli- 
cacy withheld him — that fine element of his 
nature which differentiated him from the 
ordinary street Arab, It being Christmas 
Day, Mrs. Blatherwick had exerted herself to 
induce her hopeful son to make the most of 
the propitious season ; but she soon became 
aware that the jovialities of the previous 
evening had rendered Bill absolutely incap- 
able of standing upright, to say nothing of 
melodiously declaring his trust in Providence 
in the wonted manner. So she veiy reluctantly 
allowed him to remain all day in his comatose 
condition, and revenged herself by setting 
Arthur to perform, for several hours, some of 
the hardest and most menial labour her inge- 
nuity could suggest. 

But at night the boy became once more 
free, and again wandered abont the streets. 
About nine o'clock he watched, from afar off, 
the baked-potato man wheel up his oven and 
settle down at the wonted comer, but he ap- 
proached no nearer. 

During the next few days Bill Blather wide: 



childhood's HAPPr HOURS. 115 

once more resumed his professional duties, 
and from morning to night Arthur guided his 
blind and maimecj parent along the snow- 
bound streets, suffering the extremes of cold 
and hunger, as well as all the tortures which 
the brutal ingenuity of his master could con- 
ceive, and singing a hundred times a day the 
hymn about the lilies of the field and the 
birds of the air. 

Very frequently a passer-by would turn to 
look at his pale and wan features, admiring 
the beauty of their outlines, and the thick 
golden hair which fell almost to his shoulders 
and was apparent through the rents of his 
cap. 

Bill soon learned the value of the boy's 
personal appearance ; he had gained twice as 
much money daily since Arthur had been with 
him than he had previously been accustomed 
to. Yet he seemed every day to grow 
more malicious towards him, taking a keener 
delight in making him endure hunger and 
thirst, at times almost laming him with 
savage kicks or blows, and always threaten- 
ing the most terrific penalties if ever he 
should complain of the treatment he re- 
ceived. 

Arthur's nature was long-suffering, but not 
unconscious of resentment, and at length 
Bill perpetrated on him a piece of cruelty 
which roused all the indignation lurking in 
his child's heart, and for the moraent re- 



116 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

vealed an intensity of passion in his cliaracter 
which had never before made itself known. 

Bill was partaking of a glass of his favourite- 
beverage in a public-house one noon and 
had left Arthur standing outside. The boy 
was tortured with a terrible thirst, of which 
he had not dared to complain to Bill ; but 
now that the latter' s back was turned he 
seized the opportunity, and bent to drink the 
puddly water of a horse-trough which stood 
at the edge of the pavement. He was 
in the midst of a long draught when a hand 
suddenly descended on the back of his neck, 
and, before he was aware, plunged him over- 
head in the trough. The street was a small 
one, and Bill had taken advantage of its lone- 
liness to indulge himself in a congenial amuse- 
ment. 

But he had driven his jocosity too far. 
Starting to his feet, the boy turned and 
sprang like a young leopard upon his perse- 
cutor; sprang at his head, clutched him 
round the neck, and fixed with his teeth 
fiercely in the bully's cheek, whilst with his 
feet he belaboured the mendicant's lower ex- 
tremities. 

Bill roared like a bull, thus drawing forth 
several men from the public-house, who 
laughed heartily, and began to make bets on 
the event of the struggle. It was, of course^ 
too uneven for the result to be long doubtful. 
JFor a moment Arthur's madness gave him an 



childhood's happt hours. 117 

energy which repelled all the man's efforts to 
free himself; he ground his teeth deep into 
the flesh with the ferocity of a wild beast. 

But in a few minutes Bill shook him off 
with a desperate effort, dashed him on the 
ground, trod upon him with his heavy clogs, 
and began to beat him about the head with 
his stick, when the men from the public- 
house interfered and stayed his hand. It 
was then found that the boy had fainted. 
He was carried into the house, and Bill fol- 
lowed him. 

Whilst Arthur was being attended to by a 
<5ompassionate barmaid, the mendicant bound 
up the wound in his cheek as well as he could, 
sticking-plaster having been forthcoming (for 
a due consideration) from the landlord. It 
did not appear very serious ; Bill was in the 
habit of receiving far worse damage than this 
in his nightly brawls. But the exhaustion 
of the. affair had naturally resulted in thirst, 
and Bill was easily persuaded by the other 
men present to resume his previous seat and 
call for a copious joram of the " same as be- 
fore." 

Arthur, on recovering, was accommodated 
with a seat between his master and the wall, 
where he sat with his eyes closed and his 
face deadly pale, the constant object of Bill's 
ominous observation. 

So productive of amusing conversation was 
i)he little episode that the shades of the De- 



118 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

cember night had already begun to darken 
upon the City before Bill could prevail upon 
himself to leave his place and bid Arthur 
precede him into the street. The mendicant's 
walk was not quite so steady as it might have 
been, and there was a curious look in his 
bloodshot eyes when he regarded his little 
companion, which suggested the possibility of 
drink having made his usually malicious 
nature absolutely dangerous. 

It was against Bill's ordinary habits to 
partake of liquor in the daytime ; the practice 
was, to say the least of it, destructive to the 
interests of his profession. When he once 
began to drink it was extremely difficult for 
him to abstain till he had reached the state 
of insensibility, and such proved the case on 
the present occasion. 

On leaving the public-house he had pro- 
mised himself that he would avoid entering 
another till he had reached home and taken 
measures for the suitable punishment of his 
assailant. But he had already taken too 
much to allow of his adhering to a resolution. 

They were threading the neighbourhood of 
Saffron Hill on their way citywards (Bill 
always preferred these backways to the more 
open thoroughfares), when he was hailed by 
a " pal " from the doorway of a dram-shop, 
and, wholly unable to resist the temptation, 
he dragged Arthur along after him (when he 
reached these localities he always threw 



childhood's happy hours. 119 

aside the various items of his disguse) and 
entered. 

More than an hour was spent here, and 
before he departed Bill was completely drunk. 
He told the story of the attack made upon 
him, and amused himself and his companions 
by occasionally administering severe blows to 
Arthur either with his stick or his fist. 

The boy's blood boiled within him, but he 
remained silent and motionless. When at 
length they once more issued into the street 
Bill staggered along in the darkness, sup* 
porting himself on the boy's shoulder, shout- 
ing out curses with what voice he had left, 
and perpetually slipping over the ice and 
snow, which the bitter frost-wind bound 
harder every moment on the narrow paths. 
They lost their way, for Arthur was totally 
strange in the neighbourhood, and Bill was 
quite incapable of guiding himself. 

When at length they turned into an alley 
darker than any yet, the passion brooding 
in Arthur's breast rose lightning-like to his 
brain in the form of a fierce thought. Glanc- 
ing around, he saw at once that not a soul 
was near. It needed but a slight push — b, 
weaker hand than Arthur's would have 
sujBBced — and the sot reeled and fell heavily 
to the ground. 

Acting in pursuance of instinct rather than 
upon deliberate reflection, the boy groped for 
the leather bag which held the day's harvest 



120 "WOBKEES IN THB DAWN. 

of coppers, wrenched it in a moment off the 
drunkard's neck, and bounded away through 
the darkness. 

Not for a moment did he look back, but 
pursued his breathless course along streets 
he had no knowledge of, turning out of one 
into another from a blind impulse which bade 
him thus avoid pursuit. He fancied he could 
hear Bill's voice yelling after him ; once or 
twice he seemed to hear rapid footsteps close 
upon his heels ; but he never turned to look 
round. He did not stop in his headlong course 
till, slipping on the ice, he fell violently, and 
lay almost senseless on the pavement. 

After a few moments he crept into a door- 
way, and there lay panting. With this one 
great effort of escaping his strength seemed 
to have deserted him ; he felt unable to 
rise to his feet. He was not cold now, he 
did not feel hungry ; all his body seemed 
consumed with a terrific thirst. On looking 
round him he saw the flaring front of a 
public-house at a few yards' distance, and a 
longing for drink — drink warm and sweet, 
like that they had given him when he re- 
covered from his fainting fit — came irresis- 
tibly upon him. 

With trembling hands he hid the wallet as 
well as he could under his rags, having first 
taken out a few coppers, which he held 
clenched in his fist. After one or two efforts 
he succeeded in staggering to his feet, crossed 



• childhood's happy hours. 121 

the road, and, hesitating but for a moment, 
pushed open the door of the public-house 
and entered the bar. Pressing through 
a crowd of drinkers, he succeeded in giving 
an order which he had often heard Bill give, 
and was quickly supplied with a smoking 
tumbler. 

The men around him looked at the slight, 
•childish form, and began to laugh and joke. 
One of them, who seemed good-tempered in 
his cups, lifted the boy on to his knee and 
played with his fine hair, whilst another pro- 
posed to '' stand " him another glass. Arthur 
wished for nothing better. His tongue was 
now loosened, and his native timidity had 
given place to a boldness which shrank from 
nothing. He drank the second glass, and 
jsdtev that a third, then offered to pay for 
glasses round to the group of men who were 
amusing themselves with him. This nearly 
exhausted his stock of coppers. Then he 
sang, he danced, he shouted ; and at length, 
though quite unconscious of how or why it 
came about, he felt a heavy grasp on his 
shoulder, and the next moment found him- 
self lying on the pavement in the open air. 

For a moment the recollection of Bill 
Blatherwick flashed upon his mind, and, 
starting to his feet, he endeavoured to run. 
Again and again he fell his whole length, the 
last time he did so, feeling something warm 
-on his face, which he tried to wipe off with 



122 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

his hand, and became half conscious that itr 
was blood. 

Then a long period seemed to pass, in which- 
he was conscious of nothing ; and after that 
he suddenly found himself standing by a 
small fire, with someone speaking to him^ 
There was a pleasant smell in the air, too, and 
at length he recognised his friend the baked- 
potato man. 

"An' what a' you been a doin' of, eh ?" 
asked the man, eyeing Arthur suspiciously. 
" Come, you get orff 'ome, d'ye 'ear ?" 

The child endeavoured to reply in a long, 
stammering account of his sufferings, of the 
cruelties he had received at the hands of the 
Blatherwicks, of many other things that were 
nothing at all to the purpose, talking all the 
time as if in a dream, and once on the point 
of falling into the red-hot grate, had not the 
man held him up. Then again he became 
quite unconscious of everything, and so he 
remained for many hours. 

When he once more came to his senses it 
was about nine o'clock on New Year's morn- 
ing. He was lying on a straw mattress, well 
covered up with warm clothes, in a little room 
directly under the rafters of the house. 

It was a fine morning, and the sun, though 
with but little warmth in its beams, threw a 
cheerful light on a prospect of chimneys and 
slated roofs. Arthur looked around him in 
surprise and fright, for the room was quite- 



childhood's happy hours. 12? 

strange to him. He rose with diflBculty to his 
feet, and, as the sunlight met his eyes, 
staggered back as if suddenly smitten on the 
head. His senses reeled ; his mouth and 
throat were so parched that he could scarcely 
fetch his breath ; he felt so utterly, miser- 
ably ill that, falling back upon his bed again, 
he began to moan and cry in the extremity of 
his suffering. 

There was another bed in the room which 
had evidently been occupied during the 
night, but beyond this there was no furni- 
ture. Outside the window, however, were 
hung two or three bird-cages containing 
canaries, which so far enjoyed the sunshine as 
to be doing their best to sing a little, despite 
the sharp morning air which ruffled their 
yellow plumage and made them keep con- 
tinually hopping about for the sake of 
warmth. A stronger roulade than usual from 
one of them had succeeded at length in 
attracting his attention, when the door 
suddenly opened, and a man entered, whom 
he at once recognised as his friend of the 
baked-potatoes. 

" Well, young un, how goes it ? " shouted 
the man in a cheerful voice. 

" I feel very bad," groaned Arthur, in 
reply. "Where have I got to, sir? This 
isn't Mrs. Blatherwick's, is it ? " 

The other having reassured him on this 
point, Arthur was persuaded to dress, an 



124 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

operation whicli, as may be imagined, did not, 
in his case, require any great length of time. 
His friend then conducted him out of the 
room, and down several flights of dark and 
creaking stairs, till he found himself in a 
small parlour, very comfortably furnished, 
where a bright fire was burning, and the 
table was covered with preparations for 
l)reakfast. Two or three little children were 
running in and out of the room, all dressed 
in that humble sort of finery which even the 
poorest can procure at the cost of a few 
pence expended in various coloured ribbons, 
and all evidently in a delighted state of mind 
highly befitting the morning of a New Year. 
At the table sat the father of the family, 
waited upon by a very young and sickly- 
looking woman, whom it was hard to believe 
to be the mother of the boisterous children, 
though such was the fact. He was a short 
but broad-shouldered man, with an extremely 
red face, which would have borne a highly 
comic expression, had not the absence of one 
eye given it a touch of repulsiveness. As it 
was, his countenance was decidedly grotesque, 
and, as he ate, which he did voraciously, he 
twisted it into such a variety of extraordinary 
shapes that, had it not been for the absence 
of spectators, one would have believed he 
was doing it to excite amusement. We may 
as well state at once that his name was 
Michael Eumball. 



childhood's happy houes. 125 

The nature of Mr. Rumbairs business was 
pretty clearly indicated by the objects sur- 
rounding him. All round the parlour walls 
were suspended bird-cages, mostly occupied ; 
some large and evidently used for the pur- 
poses of breeding, others only containing a 
single singing-bird. The room had two 
doors, one that by which Arthur and his 
guide had entered, the other looking into the 
shop, which a glance showed to be filled with 
all manner of live-stock, not birds alone, but 
rabbits, hares, guinea-pigs and many other 
species dear to amateur naturalists. For the 
locality was Little St. Andrew Street, and 
Mr. Rumball's shop was one of many similar 
for which the neighbourhood is noted. The 
situation of the parlour, just in the rear of 
such a miscellaneous collection, certainly had 
its disadvantages, among them the constant 
impregnation of the atmosphere with a most 
potent and peculiar odour ; but probably in 
this matter, as in all others, habit became a 
second nature, and nobody seemed at all 
oflEended by the scents. 

" Well, Mike," exclaimed the baked-potata 
man, as he drew the boy in by the shoulders 
and thrust him, with a rough sort of kindness, 
into a chair, *' 'ere's the young shaver as I 
carried 'ome last night. And pretty down in 
the mouth he do look! Cheer up, young 
'un ! " 

The baked-potato man, who rejoiced in the 



126 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

name of Ned Quirk, spoke in a hearty and 
jovial voice, though the tones were terribly 
husky. The huskiness was not, as is so 
often the case, the result of drink, for Ned 
was a strictly temperate man, but was simply 
the result of his trade ; for, whilst turning 
an honest penny by his potatoes at night, he 
exercised during the day the business of a 
€ostermonger, hawking vegetables and the 
like about the streets and thundering: out the 
qualities and prices of his wares in tones 
which had but few rivals, even among the 
coster fraternity. To the same cause was 
due a peculiar twist in his mouth, which 
gave to his face a curious expression. This 
slight deformity is no uncommon thing 
amohgst men of his trade, and results from 
the habit of constant shouting. 

'' Can you eat a bit ? " continued Ned, 
eyeing the boy with kindly compassion. 

*' I'm not hungry," replied Arthur, turning 
away from the food. " My head's so bad." 

" Ah ! " interposed Mike Eumball, in a 
cracked voice, with one of his drollest facial 
twists, '' youVe been a departin' from the 
ways of right'ousness, an a sittin' in the seat 
of the scornful, young un. Come now, 
hain't you ? " 

" Now don't go on with the boy, Mike, 
there's a good fellow," said Mrs. Eumball, 
whose maternal heart was touched with pity 
at Arthur's sad plight. " I always will say 



childhood's happy hours. 127 

•as Ned Quirk is a good-'arted fellow, an' it 
was like him to bring the boy along with 
him. "What's yer name, my poor boy?" 

" Arthur Golding," replied the boy, con- 
tinuing to stare in the utmost surprise at all 
around him. 

" Well now, Arthur, you'll drink a cup o' 
tea, and may be you'll feel better for it. 
There now." 

Arthur drank the grateful fluid, and after 
ja, few minutes certainly did begin to feel 
better. In the meanwhile the three children 
iad gathered round him, and were watching 
him curiously as he swallowed the last drop 
out of the half-pint mug. 

** Run out into the street, all o' you ! " 
-cried Mrs. Rumball. " Play there till Mr. 
Quirk's ready for you. lie won't be so long 
I daresay." 

" Not two minutes, young uns," cried Ned 
Quirk. '' An' now," he added, turning to 
Arthur, " dy yer think as you can find yer 
way 'ome, my lad ? " 

" I — I have no real home, sir," stammered 
Arthur, terrified at the idea of being taken 
back to Mrs. Blatherwick's. 

'' How's that ?" broke in Mike. " Foxes 
has 'oles, an' the birds o' the air has nests, 
yer know — leastwise most on 'em — an' I can't 
b'lieve as you're a hexception to the rule." 

Then Arthur took courage and repeated in 
more connected language what he had already 



freqiunil.ly Ji'wj-.,.,.^, ■ 

tIiivo<;liiMr.rt,v"i.'>-"'^ 
Now, lo-<l:tv, t,t..:.,'., .,', ; 
Siiiniiiy jif'j.J Si'-'v^ \ 
W(!!itlu;r l».-irjT ,..'.' 

tiriio ofj.rar, •;„...;; :r 
ri!uri|.si...;,<i if...... ";,. 

Iiav.r Ir<r:ir'i, -,f ;.^ . . „ 
Cliinillllttvc; },.,\ v.. I '. 

tlonk'-Y li.i'J ;,:-,.;',. ;',' 

lit, Ui./<j.,.,r f-,f- .'.': "" 

!i7i'l iv;.^: .;v:'j,.- . .' ■ ■ 
his l.',Ii.i:,v ,:,:-.:/■ v. 
wr;ipf,r;I ?,;,„., i . ," 
hy„.li,>:.ir,, h:y: .,.'.:. '" 
jmu:h-.>i ;,-, ;,.-.o..V =.' '. 
niuiy n'i\;'ir>, y.-,,-. . ' ■ 

, cajUniri 

tic, efini 
f "CI" 



IZ-, 




128 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

told Ned Quirk half unconsciously on the 
preceding night, relating all the sufferings ha 
had undergone at the hands of the Blather- 
wicks, but carefully abstaining from giving 
precise information as to those amiable 
persons' whereabouts, and remaining equally 
silent on the subject of his brief stay with 
Mr. Norman. 

"It's a 'ard case," said Ned Quirk, re- 
flectively, and he drew on a very big over- 
coat. "What can we do with the lad^ 
Mike ? " 

** Well, yer know, Ned, charity covers a 
multitude o' sins. Maybe we could find him 
a job. How old are you, young un ? " 

** Nearly nine, sir." 

" Hum ! Old enough to be gettin yer 
livin, my lad." 

" I tell you what, Mike," said Ned Quirky 
"I mustn't keep these 'ere young uns o' 
yourn waitin' ; they'll tear me to pieces else. 
You keep Arthur 'ere till I come back, an*^ 
that's about four this artemoon, if the 
weather 'olds up. Then we'll talk the matter 
over. Don't be afear d to give him some- 
thin' to eat; I'll stand to that, old boy." 

The explanation of Ned Quirk's hurry was 
this. In his quality of itinerary tradesman 
he was possessed of a small cart and a 
smaller donkey, both of which he was in the 
habit of utilising on special occasions for the 
purpose of small pleasure-trips, being most 



childhood's happy hours. 129 

frequently accompanied in the same by the 
three children of his friend, Michael Rumball. 
Now, to-day, being at one and the same time 
Sunday and New Year's Day, and the 
weather being unusually propitious for the 
time of year, an excursion extraordinary had 
been planned to no less a distance than 
Hampstead Heath, with the purpose, as we 
have heard, of lasting the whole day. The 
diminutive but well-fed and sprightly-looking 
donkey had already been standing harnessed 
at the door for nearly a quarter of an hour, 
and was evidently growing impatient to show 
his holiday mettle. So as soon as Ned had 
wrapped himself in his great coat — which, 
bye-the-by, had been so often and so variously 
patched as almost to resemble the coat of 
many colours worn by Joseph of old — he was 
dragged to the door by the noisy youngsters, 
and followed thither at a more leisurely pace 
by Mr. and Mrs. Rumball. In a minute the 
children had climbed into the two-wheeled 
vehicle, ensconcing themselves in the recep- 
tacles appropriated on week-days to potatoes, 
herrings, &c., and now sat hallooing their 
delight to a whole crowd of dirty-faced little 
ragamuffins who stood around with envious 
looks, though the eldest of them did not 
hesitate to make sarcastic remarks on the 
general appearance of the turn-out. Ned 
Quirk was not behindhand, but sprang to 
his wonted seat in front, rested his legs wide 

VOL. I. K 



130 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

apart on the shafts, grasped the rope-reins, 
twitched the donkey's ears with a stick of 
holly, and away they went at a sharp pace, 
pursued to the end of the street by a swarm 
of yelling tatterdemalions. 

Michael Eiimball (who, bye-the-by, had 
been in his youth a shining light among the 
Ranter fraternity, and had often uplifted his 
voice at the street corners, or amid the 
sanctified enthusiasm of camp-meetings,) 
reflected much during the day, taking counsel 
at times with his wife. The result of it all he 
expressed the same evening, when, Ned 
Quirk having returned and the children 
having been sent to bed, the two friends sat 
over their pipes, with Arthur between them. 

" You see, young un," began Mr. Rumball, 
*' we don't want for to turn you out o' doors, 
'specially in winter time when the nights is 
cold ; but you see we ain't great nobs as 'as 
got their ten thousand a year, so no more we 
can't be expected to keep you in lux'ry, you 
see. An' then I'm not by any means sewer 
as it 'ud be a good thing for you if we could ; 
I myself believe in workin' for one's livin', it 
comes sweeter like. You remember the hymn : 

How doth the little busy bee, 
Improve each shinin* hower ? 

"Well, that's always been my motto, you 
see, young un ; at least sin' I left off cer- 
tain practices, as Mrs. Eumball wouldn't 
thank me for referrin' tew. Then there's 



childhood's happy hours. 131 

that other passage, as no doubt you knows 
very well, about what I did when I was 
a child, and 'ow I come to alter my ways 
when I grow'd to be a man ; and as you're 
growin' to be a man, you see, it's time you 
bore that passage in mind. Well, the long 
an' short of it all is, that Ned Quirk and me, 
we thinks we see our way to put you into the 
line of a honest livin' ; and as you seem to 
a' been 'itherto in rayther queerish 'ands, 
maybe you won't be sorry to hear it. Now, 
if we do this for you, I've one thing to ask. 
"Will you hengage to give my missus there all 
you earn every night, or every Saturday 
night, as may be, an' trust to us to find you 
bed an' board ? Is it a fair bargain ? " 

" Yes, sir, thank you," replied Arthur, 
overjoyed in his heart to think he had found 
such good friends. 

" Well, then, we won't say any more about 
it — but shake hands. There, Ned Quirk, I 
hain't made so long a speech not sin' I called 
upon the Almighty in public prayer for two 
hours and a half, by Aldgate Pump, some 
two-an'-twenty years gone by." 

Ned nodded approval, and the counsel 
shortly broke up. Arthur went to the truckle 
bed he had occupied on the previous night 
with a lighter heart than he had perhaps ever 
known. But before he went to sleep his 
thoughts wandered, as was their wont, to that 
garret in Whitecross Street and the face he 



132 WOUKEES IN THE DAWN. 

liad seen there for the last time, still and cold, 
and he sobbed himself into forgetf ulness. 

On the morrow begun the work-a-day New 
Year, and with it Arthur's first real entrance 
upon the business of life. Two doors off Mike 
RumbalFs shop was a small greengrocer's, 
where not only vegetables and coals were 
sold, but also cat's meat, the sale of the latter 
generally constituting so important a business 
as alone to suffice for the energies of one 
tradesman. But the energies of Mrs. Hannah 
Clinkscales were not to be gauged by the 
ordinary standards. 

She was a notable woman who had, Uke 
Dogberry, " had losses," and to whom the 
sole result of three marriages remained in the 
shape of her little daughter, Lizzie ; to this 
child her mother was devoted heart and soul. 
No toil was too severe to undertake, no 
pinching too much to suffer, no meanness too 
low to practise, inasmuch as the one end of 
them all, that which hallowed the means, was 
the future happiness of Lizzie. 

Mrs. Clinkscales happened to be in want 
of a lad, to assist her in the shop. The 
daughter, Lizzie, though nearly eleven years 
old, was never allowed to do anything re- 
sembling menial work. She kept the books, 
and did it, too, in a very beautiful little hand 
which was her mother's envy and delight, but 
below this she could not be allowed to 
descend. When Mike Rumball first offered 



childhood's happy hours. 133 

Arthur's services Mrs. Clinkscales was doubt- 
ful. The lad was incapable of carrying half 
a hundred of coals, that was clear, and he had 
no experience whatever in weighing out 
goods or cutting up cat's-meat ; but after a 
little persuasive conversation on Mike's part, 
an arrangement was somehow come to and 
Arthur was to be engaged. His duties were 
numerous. In the morning he went round a 
large circle of customers carrying a cat's- 
meat basket on his arm, and, that accom- 
plished, he weighed out coals, occasionally 
made a sale, kept the shop clean, chopped up 
old wood to sell by the pound, and per- 
petually ran errands ; so that the day was 
amply filled up, and his weekly remuneration 
was, to begin with, five shillings — payment 
which Mrs. Clinkscales always spoke of on 
Saturday night as " extravagant to a degree." 
In those days there were no school- 
boards, and impertinencies, such as the arts 
of reading and writing, the uselessness, nay, 
the deleteriousness, of which cannot but be 
patent to all admirers of the good old times, 
including all those individuals who — not with- 
out reason — dread the growth of democratic 
principles among the poor ; these arts were 
far from interfering with Arthur's honest 
diligence. He had not remained long enough 
under the tutorship of Mr. Orlando Whiffle to 
greatly benefit thereby, and, though he had 
at first made promising progress with his 



134 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

letters, the reading of words of one syllable 
and the designing of very questionable pot- 
hooks had been the most that it had been his 
privilege to attain. And now in a very short 
time the pressure of new occupations had 
driven even that little out of his head. But 
the few weeks of his abode at Bloomford 
Kectory had not been unimportant in the 
boy's life. The recollection of those days long 
continued to linger in his memory, as a sweet 
scent will sometimes cling to a handkerchief 
which has grown old and been made to serve 
ignoble uses. So short had been the period, 
and so severe the sufferings which had 
suddenly succeeded upon it, that the memory 
was little more to him than that of a vision 
seen in sleep, but nevertheless, it was a de- 
light. He had not enjoyed it at the time, for 
that he had been too distressed in mind ; he 
had not felt at home among those novel 
scenes; but now, when they at times re- 
curred to him, they brought with them a 
sense of beauty and peace, of the joys belong- 
ing to a higher existence, something which 
he could never have conceived of but for that 
experience, but which mingled a secret dis- 
content, a half-felt longing, with the menial 
toil of his present every-day life. He thought 
of Mr. Norman and his kind grave tone, and 
felt an emotion of gratitude well in his heart ; 
he thought of little Helen Norman, and wished 
he could again walk hand-in-hand with her 
along the spacious lawn. 



CHAPTER VIL 



ASPIRATIONS. 



Bdt the intellect of a boy cannot feed on 
dreams, and Arthur Grolding, though he con- 
tinued extremely quiet and retiring in his 
habits, soon began to fill an appreciable place 
in the family groups to which he had been in- 
troduced. As he had to get up each day at 
half-past six, and very seldom got to bed be- 
fore eleven o'clock, he did not see very much 
of the Rumball's, except at meals, and yet he 
continued to excite that kindly feeling in the 
members of the household which had first of 
all been aroused by his sad condition and in- 
teresting looks. 

Ned Quirk regarded him indeed with almost 
paternal feelings, never failing to choose a 
stray moment of leisure to impart to him 
excellent advice, and from the first day hold- 
ing himself responsible for the maintenance of 
his protege in the item of wearing apparel. 
As Ned possessed, to use his own words, 
*' neither chick nor child," this burden fell 
light upon him. He took a species of pride 
in seeing Arthur well dressed on Sunday, and 
indeed the boy looked remarkably well on 
such occasions, his handsome features and 



# 



136 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

beautiful hair imparting a certain elegance to 
his appearance in spite of the humble 
character of his garments. Ned Quirk never 
made any remarks about him, at all events 
not in Arthur's hearing, but none the less it 
was plain that he watched his growth with 
great interest. Who could tell but the boy 
might one day attain to the dignity of a 
donkey-cart of his own, and cry out greens 
in a manner which even Ned might approve 
of? 

Sunday indeed was a blissful day to Arthur, 
bringing him rest from toil and freedom to 
indulge in those curious day-dreams which he 
preferred much to other society, but which 
were very little compatible, at least in Mrs. 
Clinkscales' eyes, with the formation of sound 
business habits. On Sunday afternoon, when 
the children were playing in the street, and 
Mrs. Rumball had sat down for a nap, and 
Mike and Ned were dozing over their Sunday 
papers by the fire, Arthur took a delight in 
sitting alone in the darkened shop, watching 
by the light which streamed through the 
round holes in the shutters the movements of 
the birds in their cages, and the rabbits in 
their hutches. 

There was a strange fascination for him in 
the voices and all the habits of these poor 
prisoners. At times he w ould whistle airs in 
a very low tone, enticing the birds to break 
out into song. There were one or two old 



ASPIBATIONS. 337 

parrots, which remained in the shop some 
time, with which he stood on extremely 
intimate terms ; they allowed him to scratch 
their heads, to put his finger in their beak 
unhurt, to stroke their feathers, and would 
learn a variety of peculiar sounds from his 
lips. And when one of them particularly 
pleased him by its cleverness he would laugh 
underneath his breath, for fear of attracting 
the attention of others, who would have spoilt 
his pleasure. 

But before long he had a human friend in 
whose company he grew to take even greater 
delight than in that of the birds. I'his was 
Lizzie Clinkscales. Lizzie was strictly for- 
bidden by her mother to enter the shop 
except with very good reason, and con- 
sequently it was nearly a month before Arthur 
had obtained more than a passing glimpse of 
the little girl, who once or twice walked out 
through the shop in all the dignity of her blue 
frock and velvet hat with a partridge's feather 
in it, to make some purchases for her mother, 
though it was her regular habit to adopt the 
more retired exit by the house-door in the 
alley just on the right hand of the shop. 
Lizzie grew by degrees accustomed to the 
sight of Arthur, and even appeared to take 
an interest in him. Every day she went to 
school somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
Leicester Square, and before long Arthur got 
into the habit of watching for her as she came 



138 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

back at twelve. Lizzie was a very pretty 
little girl, and the sight of her pleased 
Arthur ; once or twice he said to himself that 
she looked like Helen Norman, though in 
reality she was very different. As he stood 
in the doorway of the shop he could see her 
coming ever so far at the end of the street, 
for her blue dress made her conspicuous. 
Often she would be holding her slate up in one 
hand, making out a sum as she walked ; or 
else she would have her slate and her bag 
slung over one arm and be reading a lesson- 
book ; for Lizzie was pre-eminently indus- 
trious and made excellent use of the oppor- 
tunities her hard-working mother gave her. 
If Arthur happened to be away on an errand 
at such times he would fret and feel annoyed, 
often running back at a breakneck speed to 
be in time for the child's return. 

One evening Mrs. Clinkscales had gone out 
and had left Arthur in sole charge of the 
business. The boy was sitting in the back 
of the shop, as far away from the noise and 
lights of the street as possible, indulging in 
one of his favourite reveries, when he was 
aroused by a light step behind him, and, 
jumping to his feet for fear of being caught 
thus by his mistress, found that it was Lizzie 
who had stolen upon him. She had her slate 
in her hand and came up holding it out to 
Arthur, who stood in abashed wonder. 

" Can you do Rule of Three? " she asked^ 



ASPIRATIONS. 139 

speaking in a frank, pretty voice, not un- 
mingled, however, with something which 
expressed her sense of the condescension she 
was showing in addressing the boy in the 
shop. 

Arthur looked at her in astonishment. He 
could not understand her, and, even had he 
done so, his natural shyness would have 
rendered him incapable of replying. 

" Rule of Three, you know," said Lizzie, 
drawing herself up slightly. *' Those sums 
with the three terms." 

Arthur shook his head, but still did not 
speak. 

" You can't ? "What a pity ! I wanted to 
ask you to show me how to work out this 
horrid sum. Do just read it over and see." 

The boy took the book passively as it was 
offered to him. Something like tears were 
rising to his eyes. 

" You can read, can't you ?" said Lizzie, 
in a slightly offended tone. 

" No, miss, I can't," stammered poor 
Arthur, terribly ashamed of himself. 

" Can't read ! " echoed Lizzie, in astonish- 
ment. " How dreadful ! But don't you 
mean to learn ?" 

" I've no chance, miss," replied Arthur, 
humbly, with his head cast down. 

** Would you like to ? " asked the child, in 
a tone of pitying interest. 

" Yes, indeed I should," he replied. 



i 



140 WORKERS IN THE DAWK. 

"Well, I tell you what I'll do," said 
Lizzie. " You're a nice quiet boy, and not 
so ugly as those we had before, and I don't 
seem to hate you like I did them. So I'll 
ask ma if she'll let me teach you to read. 
Now, shall I ? " cried the child, her face glow- 
ing with pleasure. 

Arthur had to stammer some answer, but 
could not succeed in uttering any words. 
Just at that moment a customer came into 
the shop, and Lizzie darted away into the 
house. 

Arthur was left in a state of bewildered 
delight, not, however^ unmixed with fear, at 
the prospect of what Lizzie was about to 
undertake for him. Nor was his apprehen- 
sion groundless. In about half an hour Mrs. 
Clinkscales returned and entered the house 
to change her somewhat noticeable walking 
apparel for those more serviceable garments 
in which she was wont to wait in the shop. 
Arthur waited for her reappearance with 
trembling ; he felt sure that Lizzie would 
lose no time in putting her request. When 
Mrs. Hannah again appeared in the shop it 
was with a ruffled brow and flushed cheeks. 
Her temper was evidently upset, and, when 
such was the case, the good lady had the art 
of making herself very disagreeable indeed. 
All the rest of the evening she seemed to be 
doing her best to render Arthul* uncomfort- 
able. She set him work to do which was 



ASPIRATIONS. 141 

beyond his strength, and abused him in no 
measured terms because he did not do it; 
she raked up by-gone subjects of complaint, 
and then rated him for them as if they had 
only just occurred ; once indeed she did what 
she had never done before, gave him a sound 
box on the ears, wholly without cause. Arthur 
bore all, in his usual manner, uncomplainingly. 
Child as he was he had no difficulty in judg- 
ing it all to be the result of Lizzie's ill-advised 
suggestion ; and since he knew that Lizzie 
would be grieved at losing her request, he 
felt it to be his own duty to bear the mother's 
wrath submissively. That was his due 
share. 

Arthur had already several times given 
indications of what in a child of higher birth 
we might, perhaps, be allowed to call 
chivalrous feeling ; as it is, I suppose we must 
content ourselves with allowing the poor lad 
a negative commendation, and say that he 
was in some degree distinguished from other 
boys of his position by a certain want of 
brutality, an absence of vulgar selfishness. 
Already he displayed a consideration towards 
the female sex which the vast majority of 
youngsters brought up in his circumstances 
have no suspicion of. He liked the society 
of females, and with them was far more open 
and unreserved than with men or boys. To 
Mrs. Eumball he had always behaved with 
unfailing respect, occasionally with even a 



142 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

timid display of affection ; which indeed that 
good woman was scarcely capable of nicely 
comprehending, but which nevertheless she 
felt, and rewarded by affection in return. 
Even to Mrs. Clinkscales, who certainly pos- 
sessed very few of the distinctive qualities 
of the gentler sex, Arthur displayed his innate 
chivalry — for such indeed it was. But to 
Lizzie, who was not quite two years older 
than himself, and whom he had such few 
chances of observing, he had already erected 
in his young heart a temple for far-off worship 
— worship as pure as that of the vestals who 
guarded the undying flame. We have read 
of poets who declared themselves to be in love 
at precarious ages, and it was the kind of 
love to which they refer, a virgin adoration 
uninfused with the least breath of passion, 
that Arthur cherished towards Lizzie. 
Possibly, he too, was going to grow up a poet ; 
who could tell ? 

On the following morning he was on the 
watch to see her starting for school, and when 
he saw her blue frock appear from the alley 
and pass into the streets his heart throbbed. 
She did not look round, but went on in her 
usual way, reading her book. Arthur ex- 
perienced an overpowering feeling of gratitude 
as he gazed after her, gratitude to her for 
having wished to benefit him. Then a sudden 
thought flashed into his head. What was to 
prevent him beginning to learn to read by 



ASPIRATIONS. 143 

himself, relying upon the assistance from 
time to time of Mrs. Eumball or Ned Quirk ? 
He thought he still remembered his letters, 
at all events he could get them from the first 
piece of newspaper that came into his hands. 
And if indeed he did learn to read, what a 
triumph it would bo to steal a moment some 
day, in defiance of Mrs. Clinkscales' surveil- 
lance, and whisper into Lizzie's ear the 
glorious fact of his acquisition ! His breast 
throbbed with something of heroic fire as 
these thoughts welled in his mind. Taking 
up an old piece of a paper that lay underneath 
his feet, he sought eagerly to renew his 
acquaintance with the letters printed in the 
largest type. Alas I it was now nearly half 
a year since he had abruptly quitted the 
tuition of Mr. Whiffle, he had all but totally 
forgotten the alphabet. ''Nevermind," he 
said to himself, '' I will get Mrs. Rumball to 
teach me." And he set to work at his task 
of chopping up old wood. 

The same evening Mrs. Clinkscales was 
again out, but only for a very short time. It 
sufficed however for the execution of a pur- 
pose which a sharp little brain hidden beneath 
n mass of rich curls had contrived during the 
day. Scarcely was Arthur left alone when 
once more the blue frock stole like a gleam of 
light into the shop. The child held out a 
little old, much-worn book in her hand. 

" Ma's a cross old thing 1 " she exclaimed, 



144 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

laughing, and speaking with that mixture of 
pride and sweetness which was characteristic 
of her in a peculiar degree. " You mustn't 
mind her, you know. She said she wouldn't 
let me teach you for the world ; and perhaps 
she's right, for she's very particular about 
the acquaintances I make. But I've brought 
you an old spelling book of mine. The letters 
are all very large there. You must try and 
get someone to help you, you know ; for it's 
very disgraceful not to be able to read, I'm 
sure. Don't let ma see it for the world ; put 
it underneath your coat somewhere. Now 
do your best, won't you?" 

Though doubtless all unconscious of the 
importance of her acts, Lizzie was in reality 
exercising a vast influence on Arthur Golding, 
determining perhaps the whole current of his 
future life. Who can tell what importance 
is to be attributed to each apparently insig- 
nificant event which directs our course in 
childhood ? When Arthur took the little 
old spelling-book from the child's hand and 
hid it hastily under his coat, givmg in return 
a stammered word of thanks and a look which 
spoke an eloquence of gratitude, he received 
an impulse the result of which would not 
cease till his dying day. The following day 
happened to be Sunday, and Arthur took the 
earliest opportunity to draw Mrs. Rumball 
aside, and tell her of his earnest desire to 
leam to read. Mrs. Rumball was somewhat 



ASPIRATIONS. 145 

surprised. As a matter of course, she and 
her husband had had their own children 
taught the recondite art, though she certainly 
could not have satisfactorily informed you 
why they had gone to the expense ; but that 
2S^ child should of itself conceive a wish to 
be able to read, nay, be even willing to 
undergo considerable labour and trouble to 
this end, that indeed was something which 
surpassed her limited capacity to understand. 
The same afteruoon, she having acquainted 
Mike with the astonishing news, a counsel 
was held round the fire, at which Arthur was 
cited to appear and to give a good aud suffi- 
cient reason for the peculiar request he had 
ventured to prefer. The boy could only urge, 
in a timid voice, his great desire to know 
somewhat more than he did, and his hope 
that some day he might, with the assistance 
of this advanced learning, aspire to a position 
in life more exalted than his present one. 

** The lad shows a good bit o' 'cuteness, 
arter all, Mike," urged Ned Quirk, who had 
from the first listened not unfavourably. 
*' I'm not sewer as there's so much harm in 
learnin' to read an' write, an' maybe there's 
some little good in it. What d'ye say, 
Mike?" 

** Well, I dunno, Ned. There's somethink 
to be said on both sides. I used to sing a 
hymn as began : 

VOL. I. L 



146 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

Where Providenoe hai flx*^ jonr station, 

It is your dutj to remain, 
Content to bear with each vexation, 

And *ope as heaven '11 reward your pain ; 

or at least somethin like that. There is such 
a thing, you know, Ned, as settin' oneself 
above one's nat'ral claims, and bein' led astrky 
by the pride of hintellect." 

" You're right, Mike ; but for all that I, for 
my part, can't see no harm in readin' an' 
writin . I tell you what it is, Mike. Don't 
you bother yer 'ead about the matter. I 
'appen to know of a night school in Graf ton- 
street here, where IVe a notion they don't 
pay so very much for their larnin'. Now if 
I'll pay for the lad to go there, will you tackle 
Hannah Clinkscales, and make her let him 
horfE his work two or three nights a week for 
a hour or so ?" 

Ultimately this plan was agreed upon. 
After much sore argument — in which Mrs. 
Clinkscales began by stoutly asserting that 
she would turn Arthur away and procure 
another lad if he thought of so far forgetting 
his position as to learn to read and write — she 
consented very reluctantly, upon the persis- 
tence in their request of Mr. and Mrs. Eum- 
ball and Ned Quirk united, to let Arthur be 
free from nine to ten on three nights in the 
week, deducting, however, sixpence from his 
wages on this account. Truly the gate of 
the realms of learning did not open to Arthur 
Golding at the first blast of the summoning 



ASPIRATIONS. 147 

trumpet and let him in to walk henceforth on 
flowery paths. 

It was now the middle of summer, and 
Arthur had to be up very early each morn- 
injg*. In spite of this it was seldom he did 
not contrive to snatch a quarter of an hour at 
his spelling-book before he left his bedroom. 
Ned Quirk, as we know, occupied the same 
room, and, in order not to wake him, Arthur 
would dress with the greatest quietness, take 
his book from under the pillow — where he 
always put it before going to bed, in conse- 
quence of Ned having once said in joke that 
learning would work its way into his head as 
he slept — then throw up the window gently 
and sit down in the fresh morning breeze. 

Whilst Ned's prodigious snores well-nigh 
shook the ceiling within, sweeter sounds 
greeted the boy from without. Just outside 
his window hung a number of bird-cages, 
containing several larks, one or two thrushes, 
a blackbird, and a linnet. The window 
faced full to the east, and as soon as the 
earliest rays of the rising sun smote across 
the wide expanse of tiled roofs and fell upon 
the encaged birds, they woke one after another 
from their short slumbers, and each in his own 
language poured forth his song of greeting to 
the day. The larks especially sang with an 
almost frantic rapture, each striving to out- 
do the other in the elevation of his note and 
the prolonged energy of his strain, till the 



148 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

whole neighbourhood far around rang with 
the melodious contest. And when at length 
they paused, rather from powerlessness to 
express their wild joy than from weariness at 
their exertions, the thrushes or the blackbird 
would intervene with notes deep, rich, and 
full, piping as if buried in their native groves 
amidst the rustle of young leaves and the 
flash of dew-drops trembling in the first 
gleam of morning. 

Weary as Arthur often was, and hard as he 
often found it to tear himself from his bed, 
he always had his reward in this concert, 
whilst the air of heaven, gently playing with 
his fair hair, quickly drove away the pain of 
weariness and breathed the energy of reno- 
vated life throughout his young being. It 
was well for Arthur that Nature had gifted 
him with a perception of her beauties ; man 
as yet had done little to raise him from that 
slough of lower earth in which all but a minute 
minority of the poor toil and fret and curse 
away their little lives. 

Mike Rumball was not himself possessed 
to any great extent with the love of sweet- 
ness and light, nor was he a likely man to 
stretch a hand to a generous boy struggling 
blindly upwards. From the first he had given 
only a very qualified approval to the night- 
school scheme, thinking far more of the*, 
weekly sixpence which Arthur would lose . 
from his wages than of the intellectual re- 



ASPIRATIONS. 149. 

compense he would acquire, and very shortly 
one or two little circumstances occurred 
which appeared to him to confirm his never 
quite lulled apprehensions and to demonstrate 
most incontestably that Arthur " was not 
the lad he 'ad been sin' the day as he took to 
cultivatin' the pride of hintellect." It chanced 
that Mike had let a bedroom in his house to 
an individual named Tuck, who, during the 
summer months at least, got his living in a 
peculiar manner. He was, in short, one of 
those men you may see any fine morning in 
Piccadilly designing all manner of figures on 
the pavement in coloured chalks, and inti- 
mating, by a scroll written above the same, 
that the work was not performed solely out 
of love for art or a desire of affording plea- 
sure to the public in general, but rather with 
the ulterior object of acquiring the means of 
life. Besides his drawings on the flags, he 
esrecuted at home, or in the streets, similar 
drawings on pieces of wood and cardboard, 
some representing fishes, others ships on a 
stormy sea, others a group of flowers. 

By some chance Arthur Golding made the 
acquaintance of this man, and many an odd 
moment did he steal to visit him and examine 
his work. The artist was an idle, drunken, 
good-for-nothing fellow enough, but now and 
then he had a few ideas somewhat above the 
level of his surroundings, and Arthur found 
unceasing pleasure in his conversation. The 



150 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

result of this connection was that tlie boy- 
began to possess himself of odd bits of chalk, 
sometimes begging coloured pieces from his 
friend, and to make a display of his artistic 
powers on the walls and floor of his bedroom 
or on the pavement of the alley that ran by 
the corner of the shop. He had not to go 
far for subjects ; those birds and animals in 
the shop, in which he took such an interest^ 
naturally occurred to his mind as models to 
copy. Accordingly he exhausted his inven- 
tion in depicting every kind of feathered 
creature he could conceive, most of them, it 
must be confessed, bearing but a distant re- 
semblance to those which it falls within the lot 
of ordinary mortals to behold. Possibly they 
might have exhibited some likeness to those 
ideas of the animal world in the existence of 
which Plato and his disciples put their faith. 

By dint of much practice — for in every 
leisure moment he ran to some quiet spot 
where he could exercise his chalk unobserved, 
even his reading suffering severely from this 
alienation of attention — he would no doubt 
have soon effected great improvements in the 
character of his designs, but he was not des- 
tined to follow the bent of his genius in 
unconstrained freedom. 

Ned Quirk had first of all observed this 
strange tendency, but, like a reflective man, 
he had held his peace and merely observed^ 
probably concluding that there were more 



ASPIRATIONS. 151 

things in heaven and earth than his philo- 
sophy e'er dreamt of, and that possibly this 
might be one of those, which therefore it be- 
hoved a wise man to consider before deliver- 
ing a judgment upon. But when before long 
the chalked floors and walls came to the 
notice of Mike Rumball, that gentleman was 
by no means backward in expressing an im- 
mediate opinion. 

'' I told you 'ow it 'ud be, Ned Quirk," he 
observed, in confidence. *' Afore tliis 'ere lad 
o' yourn took to hankerin' arter schoolin' and 
such-like things, hef was a good enough lad in 
his way; but when that kind o' humbug 
began I know'd as it was all up with him. It 
was no good o' me liftin' up my voice, like the 
Prophet Jonah, an' a de-claimin' agin sich 
folly, as you know I did. I was like a voice 
a cryin' in the wilderness, an' you paid no 
'eed to me. I tell you what it is, that 'ere 
lad is goin' to the bad, Ned, and you can see 
it as well as I can. "When a lad takes to 
chalkin' nastiness on walls an' floors, I knows 
what it means ; it shows a depraved mind. 
An' what's more, I won't 'ave it in mi/ 'ouso ! 
We shall 'ave him thievin next, mark my 
word, an' then who'll be to blame ? Why 
we, of course, as let him go on in his evil 
ways without a warnin' of him. It* I see a 
chalk-mark arter this blessed day, young 
Arthur Golding takes his 'ook out of the 'ouse 
of Mike Rumball ! " 



152 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

There was no good in disputing sucli an 
energetic declaration of opinion as this, and 
Ned Quirk accordingly warned his protege 
quietly of the wrath he had aroused. The 
result was that the drawing on walls ceased, 
but by no means the drawing altogether. It 
had already become a passion with Arthur; 
he could not throw away his chalks entirely, 
however severe the penalties with which he 
was threatened. So he got into the habit of 
collecting from all possible quarters scraps of 
paper either white or printed upon, and on 
these he continued to draw when no eyes 
observed him, afterwards tearing up and 
throwing away those drawings which did not 
please him, whilst those which appeared better 
done he stowed away carefully on the top of 
a cupboard in the bedroom, well knowing 
that no one ever went near to disturb them. 
About this time, too, Ned Quirk bought him 
a slate, as he needed it for his sums at school, 
and this Arthur turned to the service of his 
talent fer designing, only it grieved him 
terribly whenever he had drawn a bird or 
animal rather better than usual that he was 
obliged to rub it out immediately, thus com- 
mitting what already appeared to bis young 
mind as the worst sin he knew of — the de- 
struction of something that was beautiful in 
his eyes. 

Mike's resentment did not end with his 
stem forbiddance of future " chalking," but, 



ASriRATIONS. 153 

on his divining the source of Arthur s disease, 
aimed at a radical cure. In short, he gave 
to Mr. Tuck an abrupt notice to quit, which 
the artist, at the end of a week's time, per- 
force obeyed. 

This was a cruel blow to Arthur, and he 
felt it severely. After peeping into Tuck's 
room once, in the hope of seeing the draw- 
ings which were his wonted delight, and on 
perceiving it bare, swept and garnished for a 
new tenant, he could not restrain his feel- 
ings, and, turning away, wept bitterly. Un- 
fortunately, Mike Rumball had watched him, 
and, when he saw his distress break out in 
tears, the man's short temper was exhausted. 
In his irritation he gave the boy a sound cuif 
on the ears, and with angry words sent him 
•oif to his work. 

Ned Quirk heard of this the same night 
from Mrs. Rumball, and he was grieved at it. 
When he retired to bed he found Arthur 
already in his, and, as he at first thought, 
asleep. But he soon heard stifled sobs pro- 
ceeding from beneath the counterpane, and, 
rough fellow as he was, his heart conceived 
true sympathy for the boy, though certainly 
unable to estimate the cause of his suffering. 
He called to him, and on Arthur at length 
replying in a broken voice, he took a seat by 
his bedside and spoke words of comfort. 

" Come, come, Arthur lad," he said, 
" there's no call to take on i' this way, as I 



154 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

knows on. AVhat is it as troubles you, my 
boy ? Mike don't mean no 'arm, though 
maybe he was rayther rough this morning 
He'd been bothered in his mind, you see, 
about some money as he's lost. Come, cheer 
up. 

Arthur still held his head down, and his 
body trembled from time to time, though the 
sobs had stopped. 

" I know it's 'ard on yer," pursued honest 
Ned, '' to stop horff yer little 'musements 
like, but, you see, Mike don't like to 'ev his 
rooms sp'iled. An' then he thinks as 'ow you 
ain't quite goin' on as you should, wastin' yer 
time, an' sich like. It's all for yer own good, 
Arthur, I'm sewer. For myself, I don't give 
no 'pinion about this 'ere chalkin' an' 
scratchin', 'cos I don't understand it, yer see, 
but praps yer won't be sorry in a few years 
as you was early broke of the 'abit. An^ 
now tell me, lad, 'ow ye're gettin' on with yer 
schoolin' ?" 

'' Pretty well, I think, thank you, Mr. 
Quirk," replied Arthur, somewhat sorrowfully 
though. 

^' Why that's right ! An' can you read 
them 'ere words o' three syllabums yet, as 
you was talkin' on?" 

*' Very nearly. I think I shall in a week 
or two." 

'' Why, better still. 'Bre's a sixpence for 
you, Arthur. I'd a unus'al good night to- 



ASPIRATIONS. 155 

night wi' th' 'taters, an' so I can afford it. 
An don't mind what Mike says, you 'ear? 
He's a good chap, but he 'as his fancies, like 
all on us. An' get on wi' yer readin', writin', 
an' 'rithumtic, lad ; stick to 'em. Depend on 
it, they II do you good, some day or other. 
But leave the chalkin' an' scratchin' till 
ye've got more time to waste, that's a good 
lad." 

Verily Ned Quirk had sound notions in 
his way, and his advice, when his lights were 
considered, was far from discreditable. But 
what advice, however excellent, was ever 
acted upon in this world ? Arthur, indeed^ 
persevered with his three E's, but as to giving 
up the drawing, as I have already said, it was 
impossible for him. He had, indeed, an end 
in view in connection with it, and one far too 
important to admit of neglect. It was no 
other than a burning desire, kept close, like 
so many other hopes and wishes, in the 
recesses of his own breast, to complete a 
drawing which he could account worthy of 
being presented to Lizzie Clinkscales. This 
was a terribly daring idea, that he well knew; 
but the thought was so unutterably attrac- 
tive to him that it was impossible of renuncia- 
tion. 

This was the inward energy which made 
him persevere in his efforts, spite of all dis- 
couragement. He felt that a word of praise 
from Lizzie would compensate him a thou- 



156 WORKEES IN THE DAWN. 

sand times for all the misapprehension of 
others. 

And at length he flattered himself that he 
had accomplished his task. With the greatest 
difficulty he had begged from Mrs. Runaball 
a fair sheet of white paper, only a little 
crumpled, in which she had brought home 
something from the grocers, and, after 
straightening this out, and cutting it square 
to the best of his ability, he had drawn upon 
it, in coloured chalks, purchased with the six- 
pence Ned Quirk had given him, the likeness 
of an old parrot, a particular favourite of his, 
failing not to give his picture the advantage 
of all that brilliancy of plumage of which 
relentless Time had in a great measure 
deprived the original. For rather more than 
a week Arthur had employed every leisure 
moment in completing this picture, first of 
all studying his model with a careful eye, then 
stealing upstairs to his bedroom and enriching 
his drawing with the results of his observation. 

Then, after many desperate attempts, when 
at length he had almost despaired of finding 
an opportunity to make the offering of his 
completed work to her for whom it was 
intended, one day he found himself in the 
shop alone when Lizzie happened to come 
through. With fear and trembling he drew 
out the paper, which he had kept neatly folded 
in four in the inside pocket of his coat for 
more than a fortnight, and, totally unable of 



ASPIRATIONS. ]57 

uttering those appropriate words which he 
had so long dwelt upon in his mind, he held 
it out with a timid hand to the girl. Lizzie 
took it with a look of good-natured surprise, 
and, on opening it out, burst into an excla- 
mation of pleasure. 

" Where did you find it ? " she asked, ex- 
amining the gaudy plumage, the shrewd- 
looking eyes, the portentious beak of the bird 
with keen delight. 

" I did it myself, miss," replied Arthur, his 
eyes moist with pleasure at seeing his work 
thus appreciated. 

" You did it I " exclaimed Lizzie, a trifle 
contemptuously. 

" Yes, indeed I did, Miss Lizzie," urged the 
boy, with eagerness. " I drew it myself, and, 
if you please, I — I did it for you." 

" For me ! But did you really do it your- 
self, and for me ? " 

" Really^ miss. Upon my word I did, and to 
give to you. 1 — I should so like you to take it." 

Lizzie laughed that clear, joyous laugh of 
hers, and, after still viewiqg the picture for 
some minutes, folded it up again carefully 
and put it in a little bag she was carrying. 

*' There," she said; "I promise you to 
keep it. I couldn't believe you did it at first, 
you know. I like it very much. And — and 
— I think I ought to shake hands with you ; 
for after all, you know, it was kind of you to 
do it for me. There 1 " 



158 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

She held out one of her delicate, fairy 
hands, and Arthur, in trembling wonder, 
pressed it in his rather dirty palm. Then 
with a nod and another cheerful, ringing 
laugh, Lizzie tripped away. Many years after 
she still kept the picture of the parrot, and 
looked at it when, perhaps, Arthur himself 
had forgotten the circumstance entirely. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



PROGRESS. 



Arthur's progress at the night school was 
very rapid, and his tt^acher, a poor book- 
binder's assistant, who, for the most moderate 
•of compensations, took upon his shoulders 
the duty of the State, and devoted his 
evenings to the instruction of half-a-dozen 
ragged lads and as many grown-up men, soon 
regarded him as his favourite pupil. Being 
an observant man he was not long before he 
•discovered the boy's turn for drawing, having 
now and then perceived sketches on the backs 
of his copy-books or on his slate, which, rude 
as they were, appeared to him to display 
something of unusual talent in so young a 
hand. He encouraged Arthur to bring and 
show him some of the drawings which, as he 
soon learned, he was in the habit of making 
at home. On seeing these his teacher was 
still more surprised and pleased. From that 
day he added his influence to those many 
hankerings after a change of occupation 
which Arthur had himself began to feel, and 
promised that, if he came to hear of any place 
that he thought would suit his pupil, he would 
■do his best to secure it. In the meantime he 



160 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

urged the boy to work hard at his readings 
and writing, and to such effect that, when 
Arthur had been attending the classes for a 
little more than a year, he was already able 
to read with very fair facility and to write a 
hand which, if not a striking example of 
caligraphy, was at all events tolerably legible. 
He was now approaching the termination of 
his eleventh year. 

One day he had been on an errand for Mrs. 
Clinkscales into Tottenham Court Eoad, and 
had, moreover, as had become rather his habit^ 
of late, wandered somewhat out of his direct 
road, walking dreamily along with his eyes 
fixed on the pavement, feeding his mind with 
the dim outlines of a thousand strange or 
beautiful fancies. He had turned out of 
Tottenham Court Eoad into Goodge Street, 
and thence again into a narrow passage, 
known as Charlotte Place, and here he 
stopped, as he always did instinctively, before 
a shop where newspapers and books were 
exposed for sale in the windows. It was a 
very small shop, over the door of which was 
painted the inscription : " Samuel Tollady, 
Printer." As Arthur looked over the 
illustrated papers which lay open in the 
window, his eye fell on a card suspended at 
the back, upon which were the words : " A 
Boy Wanted." His heart leaped in his breast 
as he carefully read these words. Why should 
he not go in and offer his services ? But a , 



PBOGRESS. 161 

sensitive timidity for a time withheld him. 
Suppose he were to apply, and suppose he 
were to be so successful as to obtain the place, 
what would Mrs. Olinkscales say, what would 
Mike Euraball and Ned Quirk say ? His 
mind drawn hither and thither by question- 
ings and doubts he passed slowly on; he 
paused ; he turned back ; again he read the 
notice. At length, with much apprehension, 
he resolved upon tempting his fortune, and 
walked into the shop. 

Behind the counter, with a book open on 
his lap, was sitting an oldish gentleman — 
gentleman was written upon every line of his 
face, notwithstanding his circumstances — in 
spectacles, with head all but bald, and a bold, 
massive forehead which might have been the 
envy of a Greek sage. His lips, though 
firmly knit, had yet a sweetness of expression 
irresistibly attractive, and his eyes spoke a 
gentle kindliness which, as they met those of 
Arthur, at once emboldened him. His dress 
was marked by a fastidious neatness, though 
much worn ; his waistcoat buttoned close up 
to his neck, around which he wore an old- 
fashioned neckerchief, which gave him, at 
first sight, something of a clerical appearance. 
As he spoke to Arthur he kept tapping with 
his fingers on the open pages of his book, 
evidently a habit with him. 

" If you please, sir, do you want a boy ? ** 
asked Arthur. 

VOL. I. M 



162 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" I do," replied Mr. Tollady, for he it was, 
speaking in a grave but musical voice. " Have 
you come to apply for the place ? " 

" Yes, if you please, sir." 

The printer surveyed the applicant for a 
few moments with care, and the results of his 
examination did not, to judge from the ex- 
pression of his face, appear unfavourable. 
Nor indeed was there anything in Arthur's 
appearance which should have made it other- 
wise. During the last two years he had 
grown considerably, and was now rather tall 
for his age, but slender and of a strikingly 
graceful form. His hair had somewhat 
moderated in its luxuriance of growth, but 
was still extremely fair, and still fell on each 
side of his forehead in pleasing ripples. In 
his features there was nothing vulgar; he 
was, in reality, a striking resemblance of what 
his ill-fated father had been at the same age. 
His eyes were of light blue, his nose of a 
Grecian type, his lips and chin moulded in 
form expressive of extreme sensibility and 
gentleness of disposition, showing traces, 
moreover, though as yet in but a slight degree, 
of an instability in moral character which was 
hereditary. The latter feature was not, how- 
ever, so predominant that it might not very 
possibly give way beneath a judicious training. 
But where was that training to come from ? 

" What is your age, my boy ? " asked Mr. 
Tollady. 



PROGRESS. 163 

** Nearly eleven, sir." 

" Indeed ! I took you for more than twelve. 
You can read and write ? " 

"Yes, sir," replied Arthur, though with 
more hesitation, dropping his eyes as he spoke. 

The old gentleman observed this, and, in 
a quiet manner which had nothing alarming 
in it, he proceeded to examine Arthur in these 
particulars. He appeared satisfied with the 
result. Then he questioned him about his 
present position, and at length, after a con- 
versation lasting nearly a quarter of an hour, 
he dismissed him with the promise that he 
would himself walk down into Little St. 
Andrew Street in the course of the day, and 
see Mr. Rumball. 

He kept his word — in his life he had never 
failed to do so — and had that afternoon a 
rather lengthy colloquy with Michael, from 
whom he ultimately learnt as much about 
Arthur Golding's antecedents as the latter 
himself knew. 

" You will, I am sure, sir," said Mr. ToUady, 
*' pardon me the trouble I am giving you. I 
like this boy's appearance very much, and 
should like, if possible, to employ him. But 
as I do not want a mere errand boy, but one^ 
who would live in the house with me and be 
entrusted with many little things of some 
importance to me, I should wish to be well 
assured of the character of the one I engaged." 

Mike listened with bent brows, his hands 



164 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

thnist deep into his trousers pockets. The 
fact of the matter was, he was not altogether 
pleased with this "new departure" of his 
young lodger. To begin with it appeared to 
him that, before Arthur had taken any such 
step as applying for a new situation, he, 
Michael Eumball, ought certainly to have 
been consulted; his sense of importance was 
a trifle hurt. Secondly, there was to be con- 
sidered the fact that, in the event of Arthur 
taking the new place, the weekly wages which 
the boy had hitherto always given into Mrs. 
Eumball's hands with scrupulous fidelity each 
Saturday night would henceforth cease to 
form an item in the household income. This 
was serious, and required consideration. 

" The boy having come to you under rather 
peculiar circumstances," pursued Mr. Tollady, 
interpreting, with a generosity characteristic 
of him, Mike's hesitation in a very much more 
favourable sense than was its due, " gives you 
naturally an interest in him, and you must be 
assured that he will really be making a change 
for the better in coming to me. Now I think 
there can be no doubt of it. As I shall pro- 
vide him with everything, I shall not be able 
to pay him high wages, but I shall undertake 
to teach him by degrees my own business, 
that of a printer, and so put into his hands 
the means of earning a very good living 
whenever he leaves me. Does that meet with 
your approval?" 



PROGRESS. 165 

Mike still hesitated. The voice of selfish- 
ness was loud within him at this moment, and 
all but stifled the still, small voice of con- 
science which Mike, as years went on, 
became, it is to be feared, less and less in the 
habit of heeding. 

'' I tell you how it is, Mister,'* he said at 
length. *' I've got a partner like in this 'ere 
business, an' that's Ned Quirk, the man as 
brought the lad 'ome that night I was tellin' 
yer of. Now I think, yer see, as I ought to 
talk it over with Ned afore I come to a 
decision. Suppose we say I talk it over 
to-night, an' you comes an' sees me agin 
to-morrow; will that suit?" 

Mr. Tollady perforce adopted this decision, 
and took his leave. The same night Michael 
Rumball communicated the visit to Ned Quirk. 
In all probability he would not have done so 
at all, and would have contented himself with 
returning an unfavourable answer to his 
visitor on the morrow, but for the reflection 
that Arthur would doubtless himself acquaint 
Ned with what he had done, and thus render 
the artifice useless. Ned, to do him justice, 
was made of firmer clay than Mike, and, 
when he heard the opportunity which lay 
before his protege^ even though it was made 
to appear as untempting as possible by Mike's 
perverse description, he had not two opinions 
on the matter, but immediately affirmed that 
the place must be secured. A long and some- 



166 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

what heated discussion followed, during which 
Mike inveighed, with something of that 
eloquence which had formerly been at the 
service of the Ranter persuasion, against that 
deplorable pride of intellect which Ned had 
always, he said, done his best to instil into 
the lad and which would one day, mark that! 
be his ruin. He hadn't much opinion, for 
his own part, of reading and writing for boys, 
for they were clearly a direct temptation to 
forgery ; but for a boy to become a printer 
was still worse, inasmuch as it inevitably led 
to the fabrication of spurious bank-notes, 
whereupon would follow exportation and all 
its concomitant evils. Ned Quirk laughed 
these remarks to scorn and was strong in his 
support of the gospel of " getting on," which 
is no bad gospel after all, if read in its true 
sense, but which, like some other gospels that 
could be mentioned, is not unfrequently sadly 
misinterpreted. Ned had a respect for learn« 
ing, while Mike certainly had not, and in a 
matter such as this, where he was truly in- 
terested, would yield to no man. For the 
first time since their acquaintance a serious 
breach seemed likely to take place between 
these two worthies ; but, just at the critical 
stage, Mrs. Rumball came in with a woman's 
tact and was successful in allaying the storm. 
She had always entertained a great respect 
for Ned Quirk's opinions, and now she placed 
herself on his side in the argument. The 



PROGRESS. 167 

result could not be doubtful; Mike yielded, 
though, after all, with but an ill grace, audit 
was decided that Arthur should go to Mr. 
ToUady's. 

Of course a week's notice had to be given 
to Mrs. Clinkscales, which that lady received 
with a slight toss of the head, aud a wish 
that the boy might find better treatment 
elsewhere than he had received from her, 
expressed in a tone which clearly indicated 
that she had no expectation of the wish being 
realised. Arthur had only one real sorrow 
in leaving the scene of his earliest servitude, 
and that was that he should no more be able 
to watch each day the coming and going of 
the blue frock and hat with the partridge 
feather, around which had woven themselves 
the brightest of his boyish dreams and fancies. 
Yes, even his hopes had, in a measure, con- 
nected themselves with Lizzie. Speculating, 
as children do, on the course of his future 
life,^ he had often determined in his own mind 
that he would work hard till he became 
''rich," not rich only as Mrs. Clinkscales 
would have understood the word, but super- 
latively wealthy. And when that time came, 
when he had made his money, had bought a 
large house in one of those magnificent 
quarters of the town which he seldom 
visited, had servants without end and all 
manner of luxury, then he would one day 
order his finest horses to be harnessed in his 



168 WORKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

finest carriage, in whicli be would fortliwith 
drive down to Little St. Andrew Street and 
carry off Lizjzie with him as his bride. O, 
sweet visions, gilding with their refulgence 
even the squalid every-day life of a London 
slum ; and thrice sweet hope, which, blossom- 
ing most luxuriantly in the hearts of the 
young, feeds with its rich fragrance every 
ardent thought. When the day came on 
which he was to leave, he saw Lizzie go to 
school and return as usual, watched her with 
unwonted sadness in his eyes, was glad at 
length when he received a smile and a nod, 
and little thought that he had looked on the 
queen of his imagination for the last time. 

Mr. ToUady received him with his former 
kind smile, and lost no time in making him 
acquainted with the circle of his new duties. 
The sphere in which he would henceforth 
live was a very wide one. Behind the little 
shop, where, besides newspapers, prints, 
cheap books, and general stationery were sold, 
was the single room in which Mr. ToUady 
himself lived, a darkish little place; and 
passing out of that by a side door, which led 
to the foot of the stairs, one ascended to the 
printing oflBce, likewise a very small room, 
smelling strongly of printer's ink, where one 
man was generally employed as compositor. 
It was easy to judge from these premises that 
Mr. Tollady's business was not extensive. 
Within this printing office a door led into 



PKOGRESS. 169 

what had previously been an old lumber- 
room, some six feet square, lighted by a 
small casement. This had just been cleaned 
out and converted into a very neat little bed- 
room, henceforth Arthur's. 

Arthur took his meals with Mr. ToUady in 
the little parlour at the back of the shop, 
breakfast, tea, and supper being prepared by 
the latter himself; the more important meal 
at mid-day, however, being brought in on a 
tray from a coffee-house in Goodge Street. 
Tor an hour each day one of the girls, in a 
poor family next door, came into the house 
and did what household work was required. 
It was distinctive of Mr. Tollady, that, 
though his opportunities of giving employ- 
ment were not large, yet he was most 
judicious in the choice of those he did employ, 
invariably finding those who were really 
in want of work, and holding that, cceteris 
paribus, those who come most closely 
within the circle of your every-day relation- 
ships, have the most claims upon you for 
assistance. Arthur did not fail to examine 
closely the details of hi^ new abode, and 
more particularly the parlour, which was to 
him the most interesting room. The window 
certainly had no tempting prospect. It 
looked into a paved back yard, with a cistern 
in one corner of it, the principal variety in 
the scene being afforded on those days when 
the yard was thickly hung with newly-washed 



170 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

linen. Immediately opposite was a window^ 
apparently that of a darkish parlour, much 
like Mr. Tollady's, and attached to the sill of 
the window was a long box containing- 
various flowering plants. The circumstance 
of this box being carved and painted in 
front so as to represent the broadside of a 
man-of-war, gave a certain originality to its 
appearance, and afforded Arthur Golding 
frequent subject for observation during the 
first few days. 

One side of the parlour was occupied by a 
large book-case, which contained the whole 
of Mr. Tollady's library. It was not exten- 
sive, but select in the choice of works. 
Here were the principal English classics, 
most of them evidently having been pur- 
chased second-hand, and also a few French 
and German books. The library was evi- 
dently that of a man who had known how to 
cultivate judiciously the emotional side of 
his nature ; the only books really bound with 
any degree of richness were the poets. 
Theological works there were none, and 
natural science was alone represented by a 
few works on botany ; but the collection of 
histories was complete and good. The 
lowest shelf was occupied by the Penny 
CyclopaBdia, an old folio edition of Johnson's 
Dictionary, and a number of large volumes 
laid flat, one on the other, the contents of 
which could not be guessed at. Around the 



PROGRESS. 171 

walls hung a few good prints of works by the 
old masters, and a bust of Shakespeare and 
Milton stood at either end of the mantel- 
piece. Opposite was a large chest of drawers, 
which at night time was converted into a bed 
for Mr. Tollady's own use. On the window- 
sill outside bloomed one or two geraniums, 
fuchsias, and lobelias. 

One of Arthur s first duties in the morning 
was to be standing at the corner of Charlotte 
Place and Goodge Street at half-past six in 
order to catch the bundle of daily papers 
thrown to him from the news-agent's cart, 
which passed by at that time, after which he 
was first of all engaged in separating out and 
folding the papers, and in pasting the placards 
on to the boards to be exhibited outside the 
shop ; after that he had to go the round of 
the regular customers, of whom there were 
some fifty, delivering to each the daily 
newspaper. On the first morning he was 
accompanied as a guide by the boy whom Mr. 
Tollady had previously employed in this 
work, and returned shortly before nine. 

He found Mr. Tollady sitting at his desk, 
over his ledger. He did not seem to be 
engaged in working at it, but, though his eye 
was fixed on the page, he was clearly wander- 
ing very far away in his thoughts. He did not 
notice Arthur's entrance, but continued, sunk 
in his reverie till the clock of the Middlesex 
Hospital, hard by, suddenly struck nine, and 



172 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN, 

brought him back, with a deep sigh, to actual 
life. Eaising his head he saw Arthur and 
smiled, but sadly, and then seemed to make 
an effort to return to his wonted manner. 
There was something in this which even a 
boy, particularly a boy of Arthur's intelli- 
gence, could not help being struck with, 
Arthur felt his master was not happy, and a 
feeling of sympathy began to be added to 
that gratitude and reverence which he had 
from the first conceived towards him. 

Mr. ToUady came from his desk and pro- 
ceeded to give Arthur a task which would 
occupy him some little time, namely, to sort, 
make up into bundles, and ticket a great 
heap of miscellaneous papers which lay in 
one corner of the shop, and which, for some 
reason, it was desired to preserve. The boy 
had not been engaged thus more than a few 
minutes when two men entered the shop 
together, both hatless and in slippers, as if 
they had come from next door. The ap- 
pearance of these individuals merits a slight 
description. 

The one who advanced first was a very 
short man, quite bald, with meagre but 
strongly-marked features, and with eyes 
rather blood-shot. His nose was very much 
hooked, and his gums, which he frequently 
displayed in speaking, almost toothless. He 
had a decided stoop in the shoulders, and 
bandy-legs ; in short, it was not difficult to 



PROGRESS. 173 

judge from his appearance that he was a 
tailor by trade. His companion was tall, also 
very bald, and of morose aspect ; his left 
cheek was marked with a large wine-coloured 
stain which gave a decidedly unpleasant look 
to his countenance. He seemed affected 
with habitual nervousness, at times almost 
amounting, in his hands, to St. Vitus* Dance ; 
he was perpetually biting first his lower, then 
his upper lip, with a fierce persistency which 
seemed to betoken some constant excitement 
in his mind. His dress was of the shabbiest, 
but gave no indication of his trade. He was, 
in fact, a seller of new, and a restorer of old 
umbrellas. Both of these individuals lived 
in Charlotte Place, and both every morning 
just at this hour entered Mr. ToUady's shop 
in company. 

Each advanced to the counter, deposited 
his penny, and received his morning paper, 
but, instead of at once departing, they took 
possession of two chairs which stood in front 
of the counter, and began to unfold their 
papers. 

For a quarter of an hour no one spoke 
(at their entrance they had confined their 
morning salutations to a friendly nod, which 
had been similarly replied to by Mr. ToUady), 
at the end of that time, the bald little man 
suddenly broke silence by reading, without 
preface, a paragraph which seemed par- 
ticularly to have attracted his attention. He 



174 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

did SO in an empliatic, here and there in a 
fierce voice. The paragraph ended thus : — 

** The Magistrate replied that, if what had 
been said were true, it was evident that 
scandalous injustice had been done. The 
perpetrator of that injustice had not, how- 
ever, brought himself within reach of the 
jurisdiction of that Court, and the only course 
open was to institute a civil suit. Under the 
circumstances, he could not advise the ap- 
pellants to do this, inasmuch as the suit 
would probably be of long duration, and, as 
he was a poor man, might end in his ruin." 

The reading of this was received in silence, 
but with looks which very clearly intimated 
the sentiments of the listeners. The reader, 
after noting the impression on the faces of the 
other two, began to speak in an excited manner. 

" There, there it is again ! Precisely the 
words the Magistrate used to me the day I 
first asked for advice. He warned me, and 
my friends warned me. They said, one and 
all : ' Mark Challenger ! begin this suit, and 
you're a ruined man.' But I wouldn't be 
warned. I said : ' If there's such a thing as 
law in this country, if there's such a thing as 
justice in England, I'll have it, cost what it 
may !' For three years I was at law, and then 
the suit wasn't at an end. But I was. Ha, 
ha, ha !" 

And he burst into a long fit of savage 
laughter. 



PROGRESS. ] 75 

" Am I right, Sam ToUady ? Am I right, 
John Pether ?" he continued, in his exaspe- 
rated tone. " When do I take up a paper 
that I don't find in it an instance of what 
I'm always saying: * For the poor man 
there's no such thing as law or justice in 
England. ' Is it going to be always so ? 
Are we going to be always ground beneath 
the money-bags of these smooth-tongued 
publicans and sinners? Which are in the 
majority, I should like to know — the rich 
or the poor? Wlwy I say, do we endure 
it?" 

" Because we are cowards, Mark Chal- 
lenger," replied John Pether, his voice 
Bounding almost sepulchral after the shrill 
fierce tones of the former speaker. '* Be- 
cause we are cowards, one and all. Why did 
I let the tax-gatherer take the last penny out 
of my house when' my children were dying 
for food ? Because I had not the courage to 
strike the man dead, and offer myself a martyr 
to the cause of justice. That's why, Mark 
Challenger." 

'' You wouldn't have done much good, 
John," interrupted Mr. Tollady, his voice and 
manner a strong contrast to the wild excite- 
ment of the one, the concentrated ferocity of 
the other of his companions. " The tax- 
gatherer did you no wrong. It was the 
system, not the man, that was at fault. Strike 
dead at a blow the passions and the vices 



176 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

and the pestiferous creeds of Society — thea 
let them make a martyr of you if they can ! '^ 

" It's all very well for you, Sam ToUady,'* 
jerked in Mark. " I often say to myself : 
* How is it,' I say, * that Sam Tollady can be- 
so calm and so quiet over all his wrongs and 
his sufferings, when John Pether and me get 
so savage over ours ?' And I've always come 
to the conclusion that it's because you've 
only suffered in yourself, Sam ; you've never 
had either wife or children to share your 
wrongs, and that's made it easier for you to 
bear them. But John Pether and me has 
had double suffering. We've borne our own 
share, and, besides that, we've had to watch 
our wives and children hunger and die at our 
sides. Isn't that enough to make us wild, 
Sam Tollady ? Am I right ?" 

Mr. Tollady replied with his usual calm- 
ness, but in a voice full of sympathy ; and for 
half an hour the conversation continued very 
much in the same strain, fresh excitement 
being derived from the newspapers if ever it 
lapsed for a moment. Then the two friends 
rose to depart ; but Mark Challenger, notic- 
ing Arthur for the first time, pointed to 
him — 

" A fixture, Sam ?" he asked. 

Mr. Tollady nodded, smiling. 

" Train him up in the way he should go, 
Sam !" he exclaimed fiercely, grasping the 
printer's arm. ** Make a Radical of him — a 



PROGRESS. 177 

Bevolutionist I Teach him his wrongs, 
Sam ; let him see the cause of his miseries, 
and the cure ! You can do it, Sam ; you can 
do it !" 

"I dare say he might make an apt 
scholar," said Mr. ToUady, in a low voice. 
" He seems to me by no means an ordinary 

boy." 

" G-ood !" replied the other; then, turning 
to Arthur, cried to him : " Come here, my 
lad !" 

Arthur obeyed, and Mark grasped him by 
the coat collar. 

" Boy !" he exclaimed in his usual excited 
tones, " have you known a single happy day 
in your life ?" 

*' I — I think so, sir," stammered the boy, 
half frightened at the other s manner, and 
scarcely understanding the question. 

" Have you ever been hungry ?" persisted 
Mark Challenger,in irritated tones; "hungry, 
and without means of buying bread? Hungry 
— fiercely, savagely hungry, like a wild beast, 
till you could gnaw wood or shoe-leather ? 
Have you ever felt like that, boy ?'* 

"Yes, sir; often," replied Arthur, and 
with much truth. 

"I knew it!" cried Mark. "See!" he 
added, pointing to Mr. ToUady. '' He'll tell 
you why you were hungry I He'll tell you 
who it is robs you of the means of buying 
food and clothing ! Mind what he tells you, 

VOL. I. K 



»» 

»♦ 



178 WOBKEBS m THE DAWN. 

my lad, that's all ; and when you grow up 
make use of it." 

And, flinging the boy almost angrily from 
him, Mark Challenger nodded to Mr. ToUady 
and left the shop, followed by John Pether, 
who had fallen into a fit of moody abstrac- 
tion. 

" Did he frighten you, Arthur ? '* asked 
the printer with a smile, when the men had 
gone. 

" A little, at first, sir. 

"You mustn't mind his strange ways, 
replied Mr. ToUady, returning to his desk. 
"Mr. ChalleDger is a good man at heart, but 
he has had severe hardships, and they have 
almost driven him mad. Now let us get on 
with our work." 

And as he turned away he sighed to him- 
self— 

" For the night cometh, wherein no man 
can work." 

A great part of the day Mr. ToUady spent 
upstairs in the printing office, where he him- 
self worked in connection with his assistant. 
The extent of his business was not great, but 
that which was entrusted to him he per- 
formed, according to the rule of his life, with 
the utmost perfection his abilities rendered 
possible. When he came down to partake of 
his meals in company with Arthur he talked 
kindly and pleasantly, as his habit was, and 
was evidently exerting himself to win as 



PROGRESS. 179 

speedily as possible the confidence, and even 
the affection, of his young assistant. 

Samuel ToUady was not one of those men 
who have so worn off the keen edge of their 
spiritual perceptions by rough jolting and jar- 
ring against their fellow men that any stranger 
they happen to come into contact with is of as 
little interest to them, except in so far as he 
serves their ends, as the very stones they 
tread upon in the street. To his new master 
Arthur was more than a piece of human 
machinery which had been taken in and set 
to work, and was only to be spared excessive 
toil or capricious brutality that his powers of 
future exertion might not be unduly injured. 
He was, rather, a young and promising bud 
on the great tree of humanity, a child of 
human pain and sorrow, but also with human 
needs and aspirations, the latter very pos- 
sibly, as Mr. ToUady began already to per- 
ceive, in a higher degree than the majority of 
mankind. He had lived many years amidst 
terrible degradation, and yet was not de- 
graded ; had associated with those whose 
ends and aims were for the most part of the 
basest nature, and yet he had already shown 
signs of a yearning for the fruits of know- 
ledge. Mr. ToUady 's interest grew rapidly 
in Arthur ; he watched him, tested him, and 
studied him with the utmost care. And as 
yet he found nothing to make him believe his 
interest was misplaced. 



180 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

Looking upon the boy as a human soul, 
and not as a mere piece of useful machinery 
in his shop, Mr. Tollady soon conceived the 
idea of using his leisure to continue the very 
imperfect education which Arthur had as yet 
received. Accordingly the evenings — when 
the printing office was closed, and only a few 
customers had to be attended to in the shop — 
soon began to be spent in the mutual giving 
and receiving of instruction. Mr. Tollady 
had ideas of his own on the subject of educa- 
tion, and felt a keen pleasure in being able ta 
put them into practice. Life seemed very 
soon to acquire a new value, a new signi- 
ficance for him. He was not so often ab- 
sorbed in fits of melancholy brooding as 
previously. 

And if the teacher benefited by his work, 
the pupil did so even in a higher degree. 
Appreciating intensely the consistent kind- 
ness of his master, Arthur progressed won- 
derfully under his instruction ; his zeal for 
his work knew no bounds ; where other 
boys of his age thought of nothing but 
their tops, their marbles, and their hoops, 
Arthur wa^ uneasy when away from the 
tasks which had been set him. Now and 
then his thoughts returned to Lizzie. What 
would he give to be able to acquaint her with 
his progress I 

But the direct instruction which he re- 
ceived from his master was not the sole 



PROGBESS. 181 

benefit for which Arthur was indebted to 
him. To live with Mr. ToUady and observe 
his actions from day to day was in itself an 
education. 

In ministering to his bodily needs the 
printer was frugal almost to asceticism, 
partly, perhaps, owing to the habits bred in 
him by a long struggle with poverty. He 
was a vegetarian on principle, and water was 
his only drink. It would, indeed, have gone 
somewhat hard with Arthur if he, too, had 
been confined to such a diet, but Mr. Tol- 
lady knew what was due to a growing boy, 
and stinted him in nothing. By dint of 
severe economy he succeeded in keeping a 
small sum of money always by him, only to 
be drawn upon for purposes of charity. He 
was charitable in the true sense of the word, 
not giving his pence indiscriminately to a 
beggar in the street, but following patient 
misery into its secret hiding-places, and 
coupling active assistance where he saw it 
would be useful with strong, manly, wise 
words of advice and comfort. Not a few 
young girls living in the gloomy neighbour- 
hood where his shop was situated had to 
thank the hand of Samuel ToUady for having 
checked them on the precipice of ruin ; not 
a few toiling wives and mothers, cursed with 
husbands whose lives were spent alternately 
in the gin-palace and the gaol, were indebted 
to his benevolence for the help which kept 



182 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

them from the workhouse. But so secret was 
his alms-giving that it is doubtful whether 
any but the recipients had any knowledge of 
it; the neighbours generally looked upon 
him as a quiet, agreeable sort of man, but 
not unfrequently hinted at his having miserly 
habits. Mark Challenger and John Pether, 
who were very old acquaintances of his, had 
a suspicion of the truth, but were themselves 
too retired in their habits of life to spread 
reports concerning it. 

At five o'clock each morning, whatever the 
season of the year, Mr. Tollady rose, and for 
two hours was engaged in reading. He read 
little besides the works in his own library, 
and w^ith these, thanks to many perusals, he 
had obtained a thorough acquaintance, such 
as it is to be feared, even few professedly 
learned men can boast, with the standard 
works of our literature. Throughout the day 
he spoke little, the words he exchanged with 
his two constant visitors each morning, and 
the instruction he gave to Arthur at night con- 
stituting the chief part of his conversation. 
Yet he was never morose ; only at times very 
sad in appearance. Whomsoever he spoke 
to, it was with a gentleness of tone which 
never varied ; harshness he seemed incapable 
of. Nevertheless he was not what we under- 
stand by a loveable man ; he had too few 
social qualities for that. In all with whom 
he stood on ordinary grounds of acquaintance- 



PROGRESS. 183 

ship he never failed to inspire respect; it 
needed that he should unfold himself in the 
closest intimacy that he might be regarded 
with affection. 

I have said that his shelves held a few 
works on botany, and this had always been 
the favourite study of his lighter hours. In 
his youth he had lived much amid the beauties 
of nature, and had been an ardent botanist. 
He had ultimately collected a herbarium 
which had been of considerable value in the 
eyes of men of kindred taste, but at one 
period of his life, overtaken by the direst 
poverty, he had disposed of this for a slight 
sum, only retaining a small collection in the 
shape of duplicates and imperfect specimens. 
It was this collection which filled the large 
volumes which have been noticed as lying on 
the lowest shelves of his book case. Every 
Sunday evening it was his habit to lift these 
volumes on to the table and go over them 
with a longing hand and a fond look, as each 
plant recalled to his mind the scenes amidst 
which it had been gathered. When late in 
the night he replaced them, after carefully 
shaking out the dust and seeing that the 
leaves were sprinkled with camphor to pre- 
serve them from insects, it was often with 
trembling hands and a moist eye. 



CHAPTER IX. 



STILL WATERS. 



Ii^ will scarcely be imagined that Mr. Norman 
allowed his protege to disappear so suddenly 
and mysteriously from the Rectory without 
instituting an active search for him. He was 
in reality deeply grieved and concerned, for 
he had already began to conceive an affection 
for the child, and had not unfrequently laid 
to rest his conscience, which sometimes 
troubled him on the score of duties neglected, 
with the subtle reflection that in adopting 
this little outcast of society he was perform- 
ing a service to his fellow-men capable of 
counteracting many short-comings. But now 
all at once this opportunity was snatched 
from his hands. In vain the whole country- 
side was searched for more than a week. It 
scarcely occurred to the rector that Arthur 
could have returned to London ; the distance 
was comparatively great, and he knew that 
the boy had no money-. But when at length 
all inquiries had failed, the labourer of whom 
Arthur had inquired his way on the morn- 
ing of his flight, suddenly came forward 
and gave his testimony to that fact. The 
matter was put into the hands of the 



STILL WATERS. 185 

Metropolitan police, who forthwith made 
inquiries at Mrs. Blatherwick's abode. By 
this time, however, Arthur had gone to live 
in Little St. Andrew Street, and no tidings 
of him were forthcoming. Accordingly the 
Rector was at length obliged to surrender all 
hope of recovering his charge. With a sigh 
of regret he settled down again to the 
epicureanism of his wonted life — epicureanism, 
that is, in its truer and less ignoble sense — 
and the episode formed in the life of the 
Rectory by the arrival and the departure of 
little Arthur Golding passed away as the 
^bubbles pass from a pool into which a stone 
Las been cast. 

For a short time after this unfortunate 
occurrence Mr. Whiffle was disconsolate. 
Though latterly Arthur's progress under his 
tuition had been very far from satisfying his 
requirements, the curate had still clung to 
the hope of being the instrument whereby 
that somewhat intractable young nature 
should be modelled into that form of spiritual 
and intellectual nullity most adapted to 
^ecclesiastical preferment. To instil his 
favourite doctrines into the mind of an apt 
and ready listener was Mr. Whiffle's ideal of 
happiness, and to have such a chance as this 
suddenly withdrawn was grievous, to say the 
least of it. In speaking to Mr. Norman of 
their mutual loss, he waxed eloquent on 
the glowing future which he had planned out 



186 WOEKEES IK THE DAWN. 

in his own thoughts, tracing in imagination 
the whole life of his former pupil from a 
curacy upwards, and well nigh weeping when 
he came back to the sad reality. Mr. Whiffle 
had somewhat of a fondness for theatrical 
display, and it is not at all improbable that 
he used the present occasion to the profit of 
his eloquence long after his veritable chagrin 
had worked itself off. 

** Such a boy, sir ! " he exclaimed, on 
one occasion. '* Bishop was written upon 
every line of his countenance ! What an 
opportunity for putting into practice the 
precepts contained in my (as yet unpublished) 
pamphlets on the Principles of Education, 
and on the Rudiments of Ecclesiastical 
Training ! I assure you, sir, I could sit in 
sack-cloth and ashes for the loss of that 
child. He was already more than a son to 
me." 

** And yet you have sons of your own, Mr, 
Whiffle," interposed the Rector. "Would 
it not be easy and natural to transfer to your 
eldest boy the care you would have bestowed 
on poor Arthur ?" 

" My eldest boy ? " exclaimed Mr. Whiffle, 
as if in astonishment. " That — that young 
scamp ? Upon my word I never thought of 
it. 

This was doubtless very true. In all like- 
lihood the curate did not think of his family 
once in a month. The most distant object 



STILL WATKRS. 187 

of interest had a closer claim upon his atten- 
tion than the inmates of his home. 

" Upon my word, that's quite a new idea 
to me ! " he cried. ** Ah ! now suppose I 
were to tackle young Augustus. I don't 
know. He might turn out something, with 
a little care. 

"I think it very possible," replied Mr» 
Norman. 

" You do really sir ? Well, very possibly 
you are right. Young Augustus ! Ha, ha, 
ha ! The young dog ! " 

Mr. Whiffle laughed heartily, rising the 
while on his toes and falling back again on 
to his heels alternately. The idea had evi- 
dently all the charm of novelty for him. 

''Upon my word, I think I shall try. 
When I come to think of it, I believe the 
youngster has brains, if only he can be made 
to use them. And if he won't take his learn- 
ing patiently, why it can be licked into him, 
like doses of physic. An admirable idea ! " 

From that day Mr. Whiffle took his eldest 
son in hand, and proceeded very vigorously 
with his education, which had hitherto been 
entrusted to a village schoolmaster of no very 
distinguished abilities. Master Augustus, 
whom we have already seen receiving personal 
chastisement at the hand of his father, was 
a lanky, overgrown lad of some twelve years, 
bearing a rather striking resemblance in out- 
ward characteristics to Mr. Whiffle himself. 



188 WOEKBBS IN THE DAWN. 

He was by no means destitute of ability, but 
had acquired the unfortunate habit of em- 
ploying it in the service of a somewhat impish 
disposition, the result being that he was in 
constant trouble, at home and abroad. It 
was to the young gentleman's considerable 
surprise, and very little to his satisfaction, 
when he became aware of his father's inten- 
tion to devote an unusual degree of care to 
his future progress in the paths of literature. 
The first few days of the new regime were 
stormy in the extreme. As Mr. Whiffle had 
feared, young Augustus took by no means 
kindly to the strong food thus suddenly 
administered to him, and in consequence the 
curate, to use his own expression, " licked it 
into him." The lessons took place in Mr. 
Whiffle's study, whilst the rest of the family 
were assembled in the usual manner in the 
parlour. Mrs. Whiffle, whose nerves were 
sadly out of order, had a tremulous anticipa- 
tion of the character of these interviews in 
the study, and sat, with her attention on the 
alert, to catch the least sounds which should 
issue from thence. As a rule she was rewarded 
at the expiration of the first ten minutes, 
when Mr. Whiffle's shrill tones, and Master 
Augustus' still shriller piping, would be heard 
rising to an ominous pitch. These sounds 
would increase, till at length both attained 
the character of a prolonged and piercing 
squeal, amid which would be heard the pecu- 



STILL WATEES. 180 

liar wish produced by the sharp descent of a 
cane upon tightened clothing. At this point 
poor Mrs, Whiffle would burst into tears, and, 
when at length she could bear her suffering 
no longer, would step sobbing to the study- 
door and knock. As a rule her knock was 
either unheard or unheeded, and she would 
hurry back with her fingers in her ears, 
throw herself in her chair, and, encircling all 
her brood within her arms, weep till the ter- 
mination of the lesson. When that moment 
happily arrived, the study door opened and 
Mr. Whiffle came into the parlour, followed, 
at a slinking pace, by Master Augustus, carry- 
ing his books and slate under his arm, both 
perspiring and both very much out of temper. 
Then, as a rule, Mr. Whiffle would set out 
on a walk, to restore his habitual calm, and 
Master Augustus would be pressed in his 
mother's arms with the rest of the brood, 
sobbing out the while that *' it is a jolly 
shame to be so hard on a fellow," and that 
•* I wish there was no such thing as a 
church in the world," whereupon Mrs. Whiffle 
would cast up her eyes in horror, or ask him 
where he expected to go to after his death, 
if he allowed himself to give utterance to such 
sentiments. 

Evidently affairs could not long rest at 
this stage, which was, in the nature of things, 
transitional, Mr. Whiffle persevering, for a 
wonder, in the task to which he had applied 



190 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

himself. Master Augustus did not lack the 
wit to observe that he would gain very little 
save beatings by an obstinate persistence in a 
refractory course of behaviour, whereupon he 
gradually adopted a more conciliatory atti- 
tude, and before long discovered that he 
could, at the expense of very little trouble, 
master such tasks as were daily set him, 
earning in consequence a degree of liberty 
during the remainder of the day to which he 
had by no means been accustomed. Finding 
that the show of interest and attention was 
what his father principally required, and 
seeing how easily he was pleased with the 
recitation of a few stock phrases SLudformulcB 
which it was by no means difficult to re- 
member, young Augustus erelong progressed 
very considerably in the art of hypocrisy. If 
before he had been a noisy, careless young 
imp, it took only a year or so of Mr. 
Whiffle' s discipline to convert him into a 
demure-faced, canting little rascal, always 
ready on the sly for freaks quite remarkable 
for precocious villainy, but always preserving 
before his father and mother a sobriety of 
demeanour and a facility in the quotation 
of text and rubric which constituted the de- 
light of Mr. Whiffle's soul. Verily, he said 
to himself, the seeds of his sowing were 
already bearing fruit. 

In the meantime the Rectory was also the 
scene of parental instruction — instruction 



STILL WATERS. 191 

however, somewliat different in its character 
and its aims. However much Mr. Norman 
might feel justified in neglecting the duties 
of his care of souls, his constitutional idleness 
never led him to neglect the intellectual wel- 
fare of his little daughter Helen. When she 
reached the age of nine, Mr. Norman took 
her away from the school in which she had 
been taught to read and write, and devoted 
himself henceforth to her education, as to 
the main object of his life. During certain 
hours every day the two were alone together 
in the study which looked out upon the lawn, 
the little girl reading aloud, her father com- 
menting upon what she read, and smoothing 
away all difficulties. 

In pursuance of a clearly defined theory, 
Mr. Norman directed his efforts mainly 
towards the development of the emotional 
part of the child's nature, paying no attention 
whatever to many of the '' branches " 
esteemed vital in the ordinary seminaries for 
female youth. Above all, first and foremost 
in his scheme of instruction, came the read- 
ing, marking, learning, and inward digestion 
of the poets. To know the poets, those who 
are unquestionably great in all ages, to read 
them with facility in the tongue they wrote 
in, this was the great end of his educational 
scheme. For inasmuch as poetry represents 
the highest phase of emotional activity, in 
that degree does it deserve to take a foremost 



192 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

place among the influences which may be 
relied upon for the moulding of the female 
character into the noblest form of which earth 
has knowledge. Not a day was allowed to» 
pass on which Helen did not commit to* 
memory, and carefully repeat to her father,, 
certain verses, which the latter always chose 
with judicious consideration of the learner's 
age and disposition. But when she had 
attained her eleventh year, Helen had already 
stored up in her mind a veritable thesaurus 
of English poetical gems, had brooded over 
them till they had become a part of her rich 
nature, till they seemed to endue her very 
form with the essence of their own rhythmic 
grace and sweetness. 

For Helen Norman was a wonderfully 
beautiful child, and seemed to bear promise 
of a womanhood fertile in all perfection of 
female loveliness. By her eleventh year the 
light gold of her many curls had deepened to 
a rich chesnut hue, the face had developed 
to a perfect oval, the nose had become 
Grecian in type and of exquisite delicacy, the 
lips and chin were adapting themselves to an 
expression at once infinitely sweet, and in- 
dicating a character far above the more dis- 
tinctly female feebleness in energy and 
decision. She was already tall for her age, 
and gave promise of a figure little less than 
stately ; her walk was upright, her step at 
once light and firm, her face ever looking up- 



STILL WATERS. 193 

wards. Her fingers, already skilled either to 
hold the needle, direct the pencil, or touch 
the keys, were models of fairy delicacy ; the 
flowers which she loved to train in the garden 
were scarcely more beautiful, they seemed to 
revive always, instead of drooping beneath 
her touch. Already she was the directing 
spirit in the household, inspiring involuntary 
respect even in so respectable a retainer as 
Mrs. Cope. The poultry-yard owned her as 
its mistress, and to no one did the shaken 
orchard trees yield a more abundant shower 
of ripe autumn fruit. She had two especial 
pets, the one a parrot, the tale of whose 
years was lost in the backward abyss of time, 
the door of whose cage stood always open 
that its tenant might remain within or sally 
forth to pace the room as it saw fit ; the 
other, a magnificent Angora cat, who was on 
very excellent terras with the parrot, and 
whose place was at Helen's feet, whether she 
was sitting in the parlour, in the study, or 
in the garden. Master Augustus Whiffle, 
who occasionally visited at the Rectory and 
appeared to entertain a high esteem for 
Helen, had once brought her a lark of his own 
capture, securely fastened in a small cage,, 
and offered it as a highly acceptable present ; 
but Helen had cried at the sight of the poor 
bird's struggles for freedom, and, instead of 
accepting it, had begged that it might be set 
loose again, which Master Augustus, im- 

VOL. I. 



194 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

mensely surprised, aocordiDgly did. Ever 
since that Helen had declined to keep a 
caged bird. The parrot could not be re- 
garded in that light, for if it had ever been 
free, it must have forgotten it, and ceased to 
regret freedom centuries ago; and, more- 
over, the joyous loquacity which it per- 
petually indulged in appeared to denote 
anything rather than painful restraint. Helen 
used to call this bird the Genius of the 
house, and it was indeed always the centre 
of domestic activity. There was no end of 
its good-natured merriment. Tom was the 
name of the Angora cat, and Polly learned 
to call its name in tones so exactly like those 
of its mistress that it was no unfrequent 
thing for puss to come running into the 
room in response to the call, only to be 
greeted by a loud " Ha, ha, ha ! " from 
within the cage. Tom, however, bore no 
malice. If he appeared sulky for a moment, 
he would, immediately after, approach the 
parrot's cage and put his head close against 
the bars, whereupon Poll would gently 
scratch it with her beak. After that Poll 
would in turn bow down her greyish-blue 
head close against the bars, and Tom would 
return the compliment by scratching it with 
his paw. This comedy was so frequently 
repeated that Helen came to observe it, and 
would often hide behind a curtain in the 
room to watch its occurrence. Sometimes 



STILL WATERS. 195 

she was unable to restrain her laughter to 
the end, and then her silvery voice would be 
echoed by a gruff ** Ha, ha, ha 1 " from 
Polly, whilst Tom ran up to his mistress 
as usual, and crouched at her feet to be 
stroked. 

To any child less wisely guided than 
Helen, and less blessed with natural gifts, 
this life at the Rectory would have been in- 
tolerable in its loneliness and monotony. 
Very rarely indeed did visitors cross the 
lawn, the most frequent stranger being Mr. 
Whiffle, with whom, as may be imagined, 
Helen could feel but little sympathy. Once 
a year, however, as a rule, the dull uni- 
formity of the rector's existence was broken 
very agreeably by a visit from his best, and, 
indeed, only friend. This was Gilbert 
Gresham, an artist by profession, and a 
gentleman of considerable talent, yet more 
pride, and very comfortable income. The 
two had become acquainted first at the 
University, and a congenial laziness of dis- 
position, a certain feeling which they pos- 
sessed in common, that, belongino^ to the 
aristocracy of intellect, it was beneath them 
to trouble greatly concerning the inferior 
ones of the earth, had bound them together 
in a firm friendship. Each of them could 
appreciate the excellent qualities which lay 
at the root of the others character, and 
perhaps none the less because they felt their 



196 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

mutual similarity. Like Mr. Norman, Gilbert 
Gresham bad married early, and had now 
been for several years a widower ; also like 
his friend he had a daughter for his only 
child, a girl some two years older than 
Helen, named Maud. These children looked 
forward to the yearly meeting with mutual 
delight, which increased as they grew older. 
Young as they were, there were developed in 
both, to a rather remarkable degree, features 
of character which already bade fair to be 
the true index to their respective lives. In 
many respects widely different, there was 
yet sufficient similarity between their mental 
dispositions to ensure much sympathy for 
each other. Helen Norman was already an 
enthusiast, her heart on fire with noble 
thoughts which it had been her father's 
constant care to nourish in her ; her mind 
filled with all manner of lofty images, each 
one magnified and made glorious by the 
ardent imagination of generous childhood. 
Living so remote from the every-day life of 
the world she had never learned to talk of 
things which, as a rule, engross the thoughts 
of other children ; the contents of her books, 
the simple pleasure of her home life, the rare 
delights of woodland, meadow and hill, these 
were her main subjects for conversation, 
and, since she conversed almost exclusively 
with her father, her turn of thought naturally 
acquired a reflective and mature character 



STILL WATERS. 197 

much beyond her years. Of the world, iu 
the ordinary sense of the word, she knew 
absolutely nothing. Mr. Norman himself 
received a daily newspaper, but he purposely 
kept it from his daughter's sight, being un- 
willing that she should so soon darken the 
cheerful brightness of her fancy with an 
infusion of that saddening gloom which 
broods over the life of cities. Thus she was 
growing up almost entirely ignorant of the 
pains and the passions which convert earth's 
sanctuaries into dreary realms of chaos and 
black night. True, as we have seen, she was 
aware of the existence of poverty and igno- 
rance, and, pursuing the bent of her nature, 
often looked forward with an eager delight 
to the possibility of one day combating both. 
As was to be expected from her wonted sur- 
roundings, the young ideas on such subjects 
were patriarchal ; she knew of no suffering so 
severe that it could not be allayed by earnest 
individual effort. Compared with the views 
of life held by poor Arthur, her late com- 
panion, for Helen the world had reverted to 
the golden age. 

Maud Gresham being two years older than 
her friend, it was natural that she should 
entertain somewhat shrewder views of life ; but 
her natural disposition was by no means 
endued with so large a share of enthusiasm as 
Helen possessed. She had been born and 
bred in JLondon, moreover, and being a 



198 WORKEES IN THE DAWN. 

spoilt child in a well-to-do house had seen 
already a good deal of the life of the world. 
By nature she was quiet and observant, 
rapid and shrewd in her judgments, with a 
tendency to epigram which might in time^ 
develope into causticity, displaying, more- 
over, at all times, and under all circum- 
stances, certain good-humoured egotism, 
which was, indeed, the basis of her character. 
Her education was being cared for at a 
London ladies' school of irreproachable 
standing, with results, however, far from as 
thorough as those which marked Mr. 
Norman's instruction. Possibly Maud was 
not so quick to learn, but at the age of 
thirteen she fell considerably short of Helen 
at eleven in the foundations of culture. But 
what she lacked in depth she made up for in 
externals. About the same height as Helen 
— who was tall for her age — she possessed 
all that grace of manner which is the result 
of a dancing-master's care, and which was so 
different from the purely natural grace of the 
younger cliild. Whilst Helen's conversation 
was delicate and thoughtful, and refused to 
flow save on such subjects as held possession 
of her heart, Maud had the easy and spon- 
taneous manner of a town-bred young lady, 
chattering gaily on all subjects whatsoever, 
and, though never affected, seldom very deep. 
Her face was pretty, rather than beautiful,, 
but the assistance of her maid enabled her ta 



STILL WATERS. 199 

make an appearance which was decidedly 
prepossessing, and gave promise of con- 
siderable charms in future years — charms of 
a nature, however, which it would have been 
quite impossible ever to imagine Helen Nor- 
man in possession of. The two made a 
delicious picture, as, with arms twined 
around each other's waists, they wandered 
on the lawn or through the orchard in the 
bright summer weather, Helen wearing a 
dress of pure white muslin, only ornamented 
with a pale pink sash, Maud displaying a 
rather more elaborate toilet, her face sha- 
dowed with a large straw-hat which set ofE 
her charms admirably. Little wonder that 
Mr. Norman and Gilbert Gresham often sat 
long in silence behind the white curtains of 
the breakfast- room, gazing in delight at the 
unconscious children. 

The difference between the character of 
the two children was very well illustrated on 
a certain occasion during the present visit, 
an incident which deserves narration on 
account of the unmistakable influence it 
was to exercise on the future growth of 
Helen's mind. The two had strolled together 
one remarkably fine morning rather beyond 
their usual limits, and quite alone. To the 
north of Bloomford, on the crest of the 
gentle hill whereon the Rectory stood, a large 
wood commenced, and spread for several 
miles, abounding in game and strictly closed 



200 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

against all trespassers. The owner of the 
land, an easy-tempered country gentleman 
who attended Bloomford parish church as 
regularly as his gout would permit him, 
made exceptions to this rigorous rule in the 
case of several of his friends, Mr. Norman 
among the number; and consequently, as often 
as her walks took her in that direction, Helen 
had no scruple in entering the wood and 
seeking her favourite flowers amidst the 
tangled copse-wood and short stretches of 
open lawn which alternated for miles around. 
Hither she had led Maud Gresham on the 
morning in question, and for nearly an hour 
they had wandered in the cool shadow of the 
trees, till a fallen trunk, overgrown with 
lichens and moss, and half-buried in years* 
deposit of dead leaves, offered them a tempting 
seat. Helen never went for a walk without 
taking some book as a companion, which she 
could either open or not as the humour took 
her, and now when they were seated side by 
side she opened on her knees a volume of 
Leigh Hunt's '' Stories from the Italian 
Poets," a book which possessed a wonderful 
charm for the child's romantic fancy, and, 
opening at the chapter on Boiardo, she began 
to read of the loves of Orlando, whilst the 
melodies of a thousand birds and the con- 
tinuous rustling of the branches overhead 
made a fitting accompaniment to the sweet 
fancies of the story. 



STILL WATERS. 201 

" I shall ask papa to buy me that book," 
said Maud, when Helen paused and asked 
for her opinion on what she had been 
reading. 

" I'm so glad you like it 1 " replied the 
other, with enthusiasm. " I have read it 
again and again, and should never get tired 
of it." 

" When I grow up," said Maud, ** and when 
I've got rid of all the stupid lessons and 
stupid teachers, I mean to do nothing but 
read nice books. I shall have a room of my 
own, and I shan't allow any one to disturb 
me from morning to night. Won't it be 
delicious ? " 

" I hope to read a great many books when 
I grow up," replied Helen, after a moment's 
thought, *' but I shouldn't like to do nothing 
but read. Wouldn't that be a rather selfish 
life, Maud ? " 

*' What is the good of having money," 
retorted the elder maiden, with true womanly 
inconsequence, " if you're not to make your- 
self comfortable with it, and do as you like ? " 

" But that wouldn't be what I should like,'* 
urged Helen, with native directness. 

" Then what would you like ? " asked the 
other, a little pettishly. 

" Father always says," replied Helen, " that 

, we must think of duties before pleasures. 

A woman has a great many duties. I am 

^oing to keep a school when I grow up, and 



202 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

then I shall have to attend to my pupils all 
day." 

" Keep a school ! " echoed Maud, with 
comical horror. " Do you mean you'll marry 
a schoolmaster ! Oh, the horrid things ! " 

" No, I don't mean that," said Helen, 
decisively. " I mean never to be married. I 
shall have a school of my own, and the pupils 
shall be all poor children, who can't afford, to 
pay much, you see. And if they're good, I 
shall often give them money to take home 
to buy everything they want. Oh, how I 
hope I shall be rich some day, to have a lot- 
of money to give away ! " 

Maud broke into a long laugh. 

" I shall be rich," she replied, with some- 
thing of pride in her tone, '' but I'm sure I 
shan't give my money away. Those nasty 
poor people ! I can't bear to see them in the 
streets, they look so horrid. I'm sure I think 
one ought to look after oneself before anybody 
else. There's the Workhouse for poor people 
to go to." 

They had risen and were walking away. 
Suddenly Maud, who was a little in advance, 
on forcing her way through some bushes 
uttered a little scream and started back. 
Helen ran forward, and perceived the cause 
of her companion's fright. In a hollow on 
the other side of the hazel they were passing^ 
lay a man, fast asleep. He was dressed in 
the most miserable rags, which were clotted 



STILL WATERS. 203 

all over with the dirt of the roads, seeming^ 
to indicate that he had been tramping the 
country for a long time. His face was hideous 
in its hairy and cadaverous squalor, and one 
arm, which appeared bare through the torn 
sleeve of his coat, was wasted almost to the 
bone. As Helen's eyes fell upon this object 
her breath stopped short, and for a moment 
she was deadly pale. 

"Oh, look, look, Maud," she whispered, 
clinging to the other s arm. " I'm sure this 
man is suffering and in want. Oh, how I 
wish I had some money with me ! " 

" Come away 1 " replied Maud. " I don't 
like his look at all. He might hurt us if he 
woke." 

" Oh, I'm sure he wouldn't, Maud, dear ! I 
wish it wasn't so far home ; I would run and 
fetch something to give him." 

" Come away 1 " repeated Maud, in a 
frightened whisper. *' I have often heard 
tales of these men doing people harm. He 
looks like a gipsy 1 " 

The children exchanged a frightened look,, 
but little Helen seemed to gain courage whilst 
her companion grew more timid. 

" Have you a penny in your pocket, Maud, 
dear ? " she asked. " Please let me have it. 
I will give it you back when we get home." 

" No, no ! How silly you are, Helen 1 I 
shall go, whether you do or not ! " 

But Helen persisted, and at last succeeded 



f 

204 WOBKBBS IN THE DAWN. 

in inducing Maud to take out an elegant little 
purse, and open it to see if it contained the 
desired coin. Just at this moment the man 
opened his eyes and started to his feet. Maud 
darted away in terror, dropping her purse 
at Helen's feet. Helen's face was very pale, 
but she showed no signs of running away. 
She and the tramp stood looking at each 
other in silence. 

" Could yer tell me the time, miss ? " asked 
the tramp at length, passing his hand over his 
mouth and grinning, whilst he eyed the purse 
which Helen had picked up. ** I doubt I've 
overslep' myself." 

" I don't know the exact time," replied the 
child, " but I think it is nearly one o'clock. I 
— I am so sorry I disturbed you." 

" Don't matter, miss, as I^knows on. I've 
got maybe a twenty mile to walk afore night." 

'' That's a long way," said Helen. *' WUl 
— ^will you take this to buy something to eat 
with ? " 

And she handed him a sixpenny-piece out 
of the purse, the smallest coin it contained. 

" Thankee, miss," replied the fellow, look- 
ing cautiously round. " You won't be alone 
'ere i' this wood, I should think ; eh, miss?" 

" No ; there is another little girl with me ; 
but — but she has walked on." 

" I wonder at yer comin' into the wood 
alone; it's lonely like. An couldn't yer 
fipare me a little more, miss, out o' that there 



STILL WATERS. 205 

purse ? I ain't eaten nothin' for four days, 
s'elp me God 1 " 

** I — I really would if it was my own,*' re- 
plied Helen, looking about to see where Maud 
was ; " but it isn't." 

Whilst she spoke the tramp had also care- 
fully reviewed the ground, had bent quickly 
forward, and, before Helen knew what had 
happened, had snatched the purse from her 
and escaped into the thicket. For a moment 
she stood looking after him in mute astonish- 
ment ; then, as Maud came running to her 
from a short distance, where she had watched 
the whole episode, burst into tears. 

" There now ! " exclaimed Maud. ** I told 
you so, didn't I ? I was sure he was a bad 
man. I could tell from his face." 

" And I have lost your purse, Maud, dear!" 
sobbed little Helen. " You will never forgive 
me 1 " 

" Of course I will, you silly' child ! " ex- 
claimed the other, who was not averse from 
an occasional show of magnanimity. " I 
have only to ask papa, and he will buy me 
another as soon as we get back to London. 
Don't cry so, Helen. That won't bring the 
purse back." 

** But how cruel of him ! " sobbed the 
injured little girl. " How ungrateful ! When 
I offered him as much as I could afford ! I 
couldn't have believed any one would have 
been so ungrateful 1 " 



206 WOBKBBS IN THE DAWK. 

All the rest of the walk home she was very- 
sad, and indeed all the rest of the day. When 
the story was told to Mr. Norman and his 
friend they laughed, and told the children to 
be more careful where they wandered to, and 
so dismissed the affair. But little Helen was 
far from forgetting it so easily. Long years 
after the occurrence was still fresh in her 
memory, and who can gauge the exact weight 
of its influence on her future life ? 



CHAPTER X. 



CHANGES. 



*** PooE Golding ! '* exclaimed Mr. Gresham, 
during a conversation in which his friend had 
been recalling the strange incidents of little 
Arthur s history. " I was not so intimate 
with him as you were, Norman, but I always 
looked upon him as a good-natured fellow, 
and rather a clever fellow, too, if I remember 
aright. But I'll be hanged if I can spend so 
much sympathy on his fate as you do. He 
fell too low. However dissipated a man 
becomes, let him at least remain ia re- 
spectable company. If a poor devil runs 
over head and ears in debt though living in 
too high a style, and then blows out his 
brains comfortably in his dressing-room — 
well, I can spare him some sympathy. But 
to let oneself be starved to death in a noisome 
garret — ^bah ! " 

Mr. Gilbert Gresham was a man of some 
thirty-six years of age, of tall and well-pro- 
portioned figure, and blessed with features, 
to adopt the easily-comprehended phrase, of 
an aristocratic cast. There was something 
in his tone and manner a trifle too supercilious 
to be altogether agreeable to one who did not 



208 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

know him intimately, but from time to time, 
as he grew warm in conversation, he would 
cast aside this manner and allow the indica* 
tions of a warm heart and acute brain to 
make themselves pleasantly conspicuous. Tn 
his talk he mostly affected extremely aristo* 
cratic sentiments, the cause of this doubtless 
lying in an exquisitely refined taste which 
could not tolerate anything savouring of 
coarseness. And yet the listener could not 
help suspecting that these sentiments were 
only affected, an impression aided by the 
somewhat theatrical air and gesture with 
which he was fond of • deli vering them. It 
was this that led Mr. Norman to smile as he 
listened to the above utterances with regard 
to Arthur's father. 

" I don't know that it matters much where 
such a man meets his end," he replied, with 
a slight sadness in his voice. " He has been 
equally a sinner against the great law of the 
fitness of things, and has equally broken 
loose from the bonds of that duty which 
should bind us all, and which, I fear, in reality 
binds so few." 

** Why, my dear fellow,'* interposed Mr. 
Gresham, " what is duty, after all ? If it be 
not the impulse to reconcile gratification of 
our most ardent longings, whatsoever they 
may be, with at all events a tolerable measure 
of respect for our fellow-creatures, I confess 
I scarcely know what to understand by it." 



CHANGES. 209 

" I can tell you what duty is noty Gresham/* 
returned Mr. Norman, earnestly. " It is not 
to continue year after year the paid servant 
of masters whom you despise or detest, 
masking with a hypocritical countenance your 
disgust for the offices which you only half 
perform." 

Mr. Gresham looked sharply at the speaker, 
and there was silence for a moment. 

** You take this matter too much to heart, 
Norman," he said, at length. " Do you think 
you are the only clergyman in the Established 
Church who goes through the prescribed 
routine with only half a heart ? What 
paragraph of the rubric have you violated ? 
I maintain that you fulfil your duties to the 
letter." 

"To the letter, perhaps ; but by no means 
in the spirit. Do you know what I ought to 
do, Gilbert Gresham, if I would earn the 
privilege of considering myself an honest man? 
I should walk down to the church next 
Sunday morning, mount the pulpit as I am, 
devoid of ecclesiastical mummery, and pro- 
claim aloud to the congregation : * Behold ! 
Here am I, Edward Norman, who have been 
your pastor for so-and-so many years, preach- 
ing the Gospel to you day after day without 
in reality believing a word of what I preached I 
Now I come to show myself in my true 
colours. Find some one else who will preach 
to you with more conscientious earnestness^ 

VOL. I. p 



210 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

— ^if you can. For my part, I have done with 
preaching for ever ! ' That is what I should 
say, and what prevents me from doing it ? " 

" A most prudent distaste for the interior 
of lunatic asylums, my dear Norman," re- 
plied the other, smiling. 

" Say rather," returned Mr. Norman, 
bitterly, " a most clinging taste for the in- 
come of my benefice." 

" I tell you, Norman, you altogether deceive 
yourself. Do you imagine that you would 
deserve any credit for adopting the insane 
line of conduct you have just depicted so 
graphically? Why, you would merit the 
laughter of the universe ! You forget that 
you live in the England of the nineteenth 
century, when * only not all men lie.' I tell 
you, the world is not worthy of such self- 
sacrifice. Morality, remember, is but com- 
parative ; and the most moral man in an age 
like ours is, I repeat it, he who best recon- 
ciles enjoyment of life with external decency." 

" I wish I could persuade you to think 
seriously of this question, Gresham ; but you 
are always full of satire, even though it be at 
a friend's expense. Why, even, according to 
your dictum, I am a most immoral man, for 
my life affords me anything but the maxi- 
mum of enjoyment. I grow more miserable 
every week. Now look at Whiffle, the 
curate. What would I give to have that 
man's energy and interest in his work !" 



CHANGES. 211 

" WhiflBe !" exclaimed Mr. Grresham, with 
a burst of laughter ; " that sophisticated 
ass with an ecclesiastical bray ! Why, do 
you for a moment imagine that he is any 
more convinced of the dogmas of his Church 
than you are yourself ?" 

" I don't know," replied the other, with a 
sigh. " At all events, he has the appearance 
of being whole-hearted in his work." 

" Now I tell you what the matter is, Nor- 
man," said Mr. Grresham, more seriously. 
^' You are very far from well in bodily health. 
You want a thorough change. What do the 
doctors say ? " 

" They allow me some four or five years of 
life yet," returned Mr. Norman, with a melan- 
choly smile. 

*' Under the present circumstances, yes. 
But you are fretting yourself away, my 
^ood fellow. I tell you, you must have a 
change." 

" It is too late, Gresham, to hope for any 
considerable prolongation of my life. I am 
perfectly well aware that the old ladies are 
already beginning to finger the shears with 
an eye to my especial thread, and only one 
thing in the prospect troubles me. What 
will poor Helen do?" 

" Do you think, Norman," replied Gilbert 
Gresham, with a touch of nature in his tone, 
*' that my theories extend to my conduct 
when a friend's wishes or a friend's interests 



212 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

are concerned ? You know I make no greafc 
account of the majority of the tasks I 
imposed upon myself when I became 
godfather to your child, and I believe a some- 
what modest computation would suffice to 
calculate the quantity of Catechism I have 
exerted myself to teach her ; but as long as 
I remain in the land of the living, don't 
distress yourself with regard to Helen's 
future." 

Mr. Norman pressed his friend's hand with 
a satisfied smile, and the sound of the dinner- 
bell very shortly terminated their conversa- 
tion. 

On the following day the visitors were to 
depart, and the consciousness of this made 
the dinner somewhat less lively than usual. 
But the dessert was destined to be relieved 
from the unusual silence, for as Mr. Whiffle 
happened to call whilst it was being placed 
upon the table, he was immediately invited 
to join the company, which he did without 
hesitation. 

It soon appeared that the cause of the 
curate's arrival was a weighty one. He 
stated it thus, directing his conversation to 
Mr. Gresham, as to one who would be more 
likely to be impressed with its novelty than 
his usual auditor, the Rector. 

" You see, sir, my mind is at present per- 
plexed on what I may venture to call, per- 
haps, a not unimportant question of ecclesi- 



OHANGKS. 213 

astical discipline. To state the matter in a 
few words, the proposition has been made by 
the congregation's churchwarden that we 
should, in future, employ for the purposes of 
the offertory small bags — ^if I may so express 
myself — in preference to the open plates 
which have hitherto received that portion of 
treasure which the congregation desire to lay 
up out of the reach of moth, rust, and — 
ahem ! — thieves. You will at once observe, 
Mr. Grresham, that the proposition involves 
momentous issues. As you are doubtless, 
well aware, the passage in the rubric having 
reference to the points at issue runs thus : 
* Whilst these sentences are in reading, the 
deacons, churchwardens, or other fit person 
appointed for that purpose shall receive the 
alms for the poor, and other devotions of the 
people in a decent basin, to be provided by 
the parish for that purpose,' and so on. We 
have here, you observe, explicit mention of a 
basiuy which, if I may trust pay technical 
knowledge, always conveys the idea of a 
vessel hollow on the inside to the depth of 
not less than, let us say, one inch and a half. 
Should the depth be less than this, the vessel, 
in my humble opinion, Mr. Gresham, falls 
more properly in the class of those domestic) 
utensils which we are wont to designate as 
plates. Now, as it happens, it is a plate 
which has hitherto been used in the Church 
for the offertorhal purposes, and, if I mistake 



214 WOBKERS IN THE DAWN. 

not, the church of St. Peter, Bloomford, i& 
not by any means singular in this country in 
the use of such a vessel. Hence, Mr. 
Gresham, we arrive at the logical conclusion 
that, although the Rubric expressly stipulates 
the use of a basin, it has become customary 
in the Church of England to substitute a 
plate therefor — doubtless owing to considera- 
tions of conveniency into which it is at pre- 
sent scarcely necessary to enter." 

Mr. Whiffle delivered the last remark in a 
half apologetic, half interrogatory tone^ 
shuffling on his seat as he arrived at the 
period, thrusting his fingers repeatedly 
through his thick masses of red hair, aud 
looking first at Mr. Gresham, then at his 
rector, then at the children, with an air of 
undisguised satisfaction. JS'ever was the 
curate so thoroughly at home as when suf- 
fered to enter at length upon the discussion 
of a question such as the present. 

** Certainly unnecessary, Mr. Whiffle," said 
the rector, suppressing a smile. "Mr» 
Gresham follows you with attention." 

" And with pleasure, allow me to add," put 
in the artist. ** Your exposition, sir, is lucid 
in the extreme, as becomes the importance of 
the matter." 

Mr. Whiffle bowed, and continued with a 
gratified smile — 

" Having arrived at this conclusion — viz,, 
that the strict prescription of the rubric has 



CnANGES. 21 5 

already submitted to modification in obedi- 
ence to the dictates of conveniency, we have, 
as you will recognise, Mr. Gresham, estab- 
lished a precedent — a precedent, sir." The 
curate dwelt on the word with satisfaction. 
" So far then, sir, there is nothing whatever 
objectionable in the proposition that Mr. 
Vokins, the churchwarden, has felt called 
upon to make ; that I must in fairness admit. 
But when we examine the motives which 
Vokins urges as in favour of the substitution 
of — so to speak — a bag or wallet, in the 
place of the present plate^ it appears to me 
that we trench upon very debateable ground. 
Mr. Vokins— ahem ! — makes the statement, 
Mr. Gresham, that many members of the 
congregation who would be glad to contribute 
their mite on the occasion of collections are 
restrained from doing so by the fear of public 
opinion ; in other words, they prefer not to 
give at all to depositing on an open plate, in 
the full view of their neighbours, for the time 
being, a coin which, by its diminutive value, 
would seem to lay an imputation either upon 
their liberality, or, what is still worse, upon 
the condition of their finances. Now, gentle- 
men, this is a frame of mind singularly 
human, it must be confessed, and one which, 
though raised above those ordinary frailties 
of the flesh by our position as servants in 
that glorious Temple which we denominate 
the Church of England as by law established, 



216 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

it behoves us to take into consideration. I, 
individually, still hold my judgment in sus- 
pense, though I confess to having spent con- 
siderable thought on the subject. On the 
one hand we must weigh whether it is con- 
sistent with the dignity of The Church to 
make concessions to human weaknesses, such 
as those so acutely observed by Mr. Vokins; 
on the other, I opine that we ought to con- 
sider whether such concession may not appear 
justified by the, doubtless, not inconsiderable 
accession of voluntary offering which would 
accrue to St. Peter's in the event of bags — so 
to speak — beings substituted for plates. 
Might I venture to ask your opinion, Mr. 
Gresham, as that of a disinterested ob- 
server ?" 

" You do me too much honour, Mr. 
Whiffle," responded the artist, in a tone of 
fine sarcasm, wholly unrecognisable as such 
by the vanity of the curate. "There is, 
doubtless, much to be said on both sides ; 
but, if I may express an opinion, I think it 
just possible that history, if well searched, 
might afford a precedent^ — a precedent, sir — 
for the dignity of the Church giving way 
before such very important considerations as 
those which we, in worldly phrase, denomi- 
nate pecuniary." 

" I think you are right, sir ! " exclaimed 
the curate. *' Allow me to compliment you 
on your delicate penetration in so nice a 



CHANGES. 217 

matter. And, possibly, since you have so 
expressed yourself, I may venture to declare 
that T rather incline to Mr. Vokins's opinion 
in this matter. We are well aware, Mr. 
Oresham, that twelve of those humble coins 
called halfpence amount to the value of a 
silver sixpenny-piece ; as also that twelve of 
the but sliLjhtly more dignified pennies repre- 
sent the value of a silver shilling ; and 1 have 
yet to learn, gentlemen, that the current 
value of a fixed sum of money diminishes 
with the denomination of the factor in which 
it is expressed. Mr. Gresham will forgive 
the figure in the lips of one who once 
boasted himself something of a mathema- 
tician." 

The conversation continued in the same 
strain for some half hour longer, Mr. WhiflSe 
taking upon himself the main burden of it. 
At the end of that time Mr. Norman rose 
from the table and dismissed the subject 
with the remark that he would give it his 
consideration, upon which assurance Mr. 
Whiffle retired, excellently well pleased at 
having had such a remarkable opportunity 
of displaying his ingenuity and eloquence. 

The church of St. Peter's, Bloomford, 
was conducted on Low Church Evangelical 
principles. The interior was very plain, and 
the service was totally without those adul- 
terated reminiscences of Romanism with 
which most of the churches in that part of 



218 WOBKERS IN THE DAWN. 

the country were then seeking to enliven the 
zeal of not too ardent congregations. This 
had been the state of affairs throughout 
the period of Mr. Norman's incumbency, in 
the early years owing to his convictions, 
later on account of habit and carelessness 
rather than anything else. But it was a 
state of affairs by no means agreeable to 
Mr. Whiffle, who had for a long time been 
doing his very best to breathe something 
of the spirit of Ritualism into the rector's 
Gallio-like disposition. His efforts had,, 
naturally, been unsuccessful, greatly to the 
curate's chagrin. Had Mr. Whiffle had his 
will, St. Peter's would have been immedi- 
ately converted into a model of advanced 
High Chut'chism. Thus it was that every 
subject of discourse connected with the 
service of the church was seized upon by 
him with eagerness, if only for the sake of 
averting stagnation. 

In the meantime he consoled himself with 
the imagination of what he would do when 
the presentation, to which he never ceased 
to look forward, should ultimately realise 
itself. 

And, indeed, it was just now nearer than 
Mr. Whiffle's most ardent hopes could have 
conceived. Mr. Norman, whose consump- 
tion, though working but slowly upon his- 
frame, was none the less surely w^asting him 
away, would long ago have resigned his 



CHANGES. 219 

living and gone to live in a more suitable 
climate, had it not been that the income of 
his rectory was quite indispensable to enable 
him to live in accordance with his usual 
habits. During the last half a dozen years 
he had twice spent several months of the 
winter at Mentone, each time to the manifest 
improvement of his health, and a not incon- 
siderable lengthening of his life might 
reasonably be hoped for were he able to 
establish himself permanently in that grate- 
ful climate. He would also have desired to 
live for some time on the Continent on 
Helen's account, for he was, of course, unable 
himself to give her the thorough instruction 
in the modern languages which he had set his 
heart upon her having. Reflection on these 
matters had often made him unusually 
melancholy of late, and a decided advance of 
his malady also made itself apparent. 

He had almost resolved once more to 
obtain leave of absence for a few months, 
and this time in company with Helen, to re* 
visit Mentone, when he received one morning, 
early in November, a letter bearing the seal 
of a firm of London solicitors. Upon reading 
it he became so nervously agitated as to 
bring on a severe fit of coughing, followed by 
spitting of blood. For the rest of the day he 
was quite incapable of maintaining any calm- 
ness, but paced his garden for several hours 
with the letter in his hand, constantly refer- 



220 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

ring to it ; and, on entering the house, 
walked in uncertainty between his study and 
the parlour, totally neglecting all food, and 
even Helen's lessons. Early on the following 
morniDg he came down, after a sleepless 
night, dressed for a journey, partook of a 
very slight breakfast, and walked to the rail- 
way station, where he took one of the first 
trains to London, having merely left a mes- 
sage behind for Helen, saying where he was 
gone. On arriving in town he went straight 
to the abode of his friend Gresham, in the 
neighbourhood of Regent's Park, but was so 
unfortunate as to find Mr. Gresham and his 
daughter from home. Thereupon he drove 
to his usual hotel in Oxford Street, and was 
very much engaged during three days, 
principally within the precincts of Gray's 
Inn. At the end of that time he returned to 
Bloomford. The excitement of his business 
had been so very unusual that it operated 
most unfavourably on his delicate state of 
health, and for several days he was confined 
to his room. On the last of those days he 
wrote the following letter — 

" Bloomford Rectory, 
'' November 13th, 1863- 
** My deae Gilbert, 

" I dare say you will have learnt 
by this time that I made a very unexpected 
descent upon your dwelling some ten days 



CHANGES. 221 

ago, and found it vacant. Since my return 
to Bloomford, I have suffered from some con- 
founded nervous complaint or other, which 
has rendered me incapable of penning you a 
line. But I must no longer delay letting you 
hear a piece of news which I doubt not will 
rejoice you. 

" The occasion of my going town was no 
other than this. I received a letter from 
Messrs. Connor and Tweed, of Gray's Inn 
Square, acquainting me with the fact that my 
brother William had recently died in San 
Francisco, intestate, that he had left behind 
him possessions to the amount of some 
£50,000, and that in default of a nearer heir, 
the whole of this fell to me ! I think I have 
often told you of William's peculiarities- 
Nothing at all like a disagreement ever took 
place between him and myself, but as he went 
out to California some ten years ago, and has 
ever since been a desperately bad correspon- 
dent, we may be said to have become almost 
total strangers. I had no notion that he had 
become so wealthy, but as I fully believe that, 
had he made a will, he would have left, at all 
events, the bulk of his wealth to me, I have 
no hesitation whatever in availing myself of 
my legal rights in the matter. 

'* I need scarcely say how welcome such a 
windfall as this is. During the last few days 
I have reflected much on my future course, 
and, subject to any little modifications my 



222 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

friends and advisers may suggest, I think it 
will be pretty much as follows. As I am 
about as unfitted as it is possible for a man 
to be for my position in the Church, I shall 
as soon as possible resign my living, and bid 
adieu for ever to creeds and catechisms ! 
Congratulate me on this, my dear Gilbert. 
Then, as I feel that my days are numbered, 
and, for the sake of Helen, I should like to 
remain still as long as possible in the land of 
the living — which I have found on the whole 
remarkably agreeable — I shall forthwith 
transplant myself to some more congenial 
climate, say to Mentone, or some such place, 
and there seek to enjoy the remainder of my 
life in that quiet manner of which, I flatter 
myself, I have so well learnt the secret. In 
doing this I contemplate no waste of time. 
Helen will of course go with me ; I should 
like her to have a Continental education. 

" And now, my dear Gilbert, let me see 
you as soon as possible. Come down on 
Monday, if you can, and bring Maud with 
you. It may be some time before she and 
Helen have another opportunity of seeing 
each other. I must not write any more, as 
I feel my head-ache approaching. Farewell 
for the present. 

" Yours, ever affectionately, 
" Edward Norman." 

Mr. Gresham obeyed the call, and the fol- 



CHANGES. 223 

lowing Monday saw him and his daughter 
once more at Bloomford. They only remained 
two days, during which long conversations 
took place between them, and many matters 
of importance were decided. First of all it 
was determined that Mr. Norman should, as 
soon as it was practicable, resign his living 
and quit Bloomford ; that thereupon he should 
take up his abode with Mr. Gresham in 
London till all necessary arrangements for 
his leaving England could be completed ; and 
that as early in the following year as pos- 
sible he should remove with Helen to Men- 
tone. 

Never, it seemed to Mr. Norman, had he 
known what real happiness was till now, 
never had he yearned more eagerly for any 
day than for that which would fairly set him 
loose from the bonds of his clerical position, 
for years intolerably galling. The condition 
which had been the dream of his life, he had 
at length lived to realise ; he found himself 
henceforth at liberty to enjoy the remainder 
of his days in that absolute freedom from 
official restraint which was naturally the 
ideal of his epicurean nature. Henceforth he 
had but one serious care, the education of his 
daughter Helen, and that indeed was so com- 
pletely a task dictated by ardent affection and 
the loftiest emotions of which he was capable, 
that it was anything but a drawback upon 
his freedom. This duty, however, excepted. 



224 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

his days were his own. No longer need he 
rise with a sigh from his beloved poets, to 
turn in disgust to the compilation of an 
insipid sermon ; no longer would the calm 
peace of his Sundays be broken by the neces- 
sity of presiding at ceremonies which he 
loathed in every detail. Above all he would 
no longer be oppressed by that hideous night- 
mare of hypocrisy, so inimical to his instincts, 
but which he had been compelled by weakness 
and the force of circumstances so long to hug 
to his bosom. What mornings would now 
be his in the glowing atmosphere of southern 
lands, what ambrosial nights would it be his 
happy lot to enjoy, watching the full moon 
scatter silvery beams on the smooth surface 
of a tideless sea ! Oh, ye gods, was not the 
cup of bliss too full ? What if he were slowly 
but surely sinking to the grave beneath a re- 
morseless disease ; at least he would derive 
the maximum of enjoyment from those suns 
which would rise upon him, and what more 
could he wish ? Man is mortal, and sufficient 
for the day is the evil thereof. 

By Christmas, Mr. Norman had already 
resigned his living, and had left Bloomford. 
For several weeks speculation was rife in the 
village with regard to his successor, and many 
were the prayers breathed up that he might 
be a young unmarried man. Whether agree- 
able or not, mattered little ; for Bloomford 
was a rich living. Mr. Whiffle was elated 



OHANQES. 225 

with all manner, of hopes, it being principally 
in votis that the new incumbent might be a 
man of strong High Church sympathies. And 
so indeed he ultimately proved to be. For 
Mr. Norman, who cherished some degree of 
good feeling towards his old curate, and was 
perhaps infected with that fever of generosity 
which often possesses sudden heirs to a for- 
tune, exerted his influence with the patron of 
the living, and without much difficulty secured 
the presentation of it to Mr. Whiffle himself. 

I shall not attempt in this place to describe 
the state of mind into which the quondam 
curate was thrown by the communication of 
this piece of intelligence. For the present it 
may safely be left for the reader's imagination 
to depict. It is not unlikely we may have 
other opportunities of observing Mr. Whiffle 
with his honours fresh upon him. 

In the meantime Mr. Norman and Helen 
were residing at Mr. Gresham's, in Portland 
Place. The little girl had never before been 
in London, and now went the round of the 
sights, accompanied sometimes by her father, 
sometimes by Maud and Miss Wilson, Maud's 
governess. She enjoyed it all in a quiet, self- 
contained manner, very rarely breaking into 
childish delight ; a circumstance which some- 
what surprised her father, who knew so well 
her ardent temperamefit. The fact was she 
was rather oppressed by the multitude of 

VOL. I. Q 



226 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

novel scenes, and by the strange sensation 
of living amidst so much life. It was only 
in the calm intimacy of the home circle that 
Helen could open her heart and speak freely 
all her impressions ; a natural shyness kept 
her reserve^ in the presence of strangers. 
Only once did the stately little maiden allow 
herself to be betrayed into strong delight, 
and that was on the occasion of a visit to 
Westminster Abbey together with her father 
and Maud. At the sight of the tombs bear- 
ing names which she knew so well, and which, 
young as she was, she had already learned 
to love, she almost cried aloud with rapture, 
and when she issued from the solemn gloom 
of the Abbey into the open air, Mr. Norman 
noticed, not without pride, that her eyes were 
dim with moisture. 

Mr. Gresham's house was for ever full of 
gay company, but of this neither Helen nor 
her father saw much. The daily lessons were 
continued as usual, and Miss Wilson's skill 
was called into requisition to continue the 
musical instruction which had hitherto been 
superintended by the organist of St. Peter s 
church, a young man of only moderate 
abilities. And so the time passed till the 
commencement of February, when at length 
all Mr. Norman's preparations were complete, 
and the day was appointed on which he would 
leave England. Mr. Gresham and Maud ac- 
companied the two as far as the boat which 



CHANGES. 227 

was to take them across the Channel, and 
here bade them farewell. 

A week after, Maud Gresham received the 
following letter — 

" Mentone, 

"Feb. 8th, 1864. 
''^Mt dear Maud, 

" I promised to write to you as 
soon as possible, and let you know that we 
got here safely. The passage was a little 
rough, and I was a little ill, but it soon 
passed away when we reached land. I like 
Mentone very much, dear Maud ; but I should 
like ifc better if you were with me. Papa 
says he is much better already. I am so glad, 
for you know how much I love dear papa. I 
enjoyed myself very much at your house, 
and I shall never forget the beautiful sights 
of London, and above all that dear West- 
minster Abbey. Try to remember me and 
write when you have time. I will write again 
soon and let you know everything that I do. 
Papa has got me a teacher for French and 
German. I like her very much, but she has 
a queer name which I cannot pronounce. I 
am very happy, and I hope you are. Good- 

"''■ " Fro. .our loving Friend. 

" Helen Norman." 



1 



CHAPTER XL 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 



Calm, uneventful were the years which suc- 
ceeded Arthur's establishment under Mr. Tdl- 
lady's roof. Uneventful outwardly, that is ; for 
as regards those unseen circumstances, those 
silent conquests, defeats, and revolutions 
which succeed one another in the hidden 
depths of an expanding mind, these years 
from twelve to eighteen were fruitful to a 
degree of which we can only convey a partial 
idea by dwelling on a few of the visible 
results. Samuel Tollady had had no occasion 
to regret the attention he had paid to 
Arthur's intellectual training. The boy from 
the first picked up knowledge with an almost 
incredible facility ; so quickly, indeed, that 
his master began before long to fear that his 
own knowledge would soon be insufficient to 
guide the boy's mind in those paths which it 
pursued with such eager delight. The 
printer was a most indulgent master, per- 
mitting to Arthur every practicable moment of 
leisure time, and not unfrequently himself 
performing tasks which were the boy's proper 
work, in order that the latter might enjoy 
the fruits of an extra hour spent over the 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 229 

book he happened to be reading* Indeed it 
would be scarcely correct to speak of the 
two in the mutual relationship of master and 
servant, for a very few months sufficed to 
create between them a feeling of mutual 
affection, which, as time went on, was 
strengthened on Arthur's side by growing 
respect, at times almost veneration, and on 
that of the old man by genuine admiration 
of, and pride in, the powers which he saw 
developing beneath his fostering care. By 
when Arthur had reached his fifteenth year, 
an actual son of his own could scarcely have 
been more to Mr. ToUady than he was ; and 
if ever Arthur endeavoured to recall to his 
mind the aspect of that father whom he had 
so bitterly mourned years ago, he was quite 
unable to dissociate the dim memory of his 
features from the look of those grave, kind 
eyes which so often rested upon him during 
the day with affectionate interest. • 

About this time Mr. Tollady began to give 
Arthur his first lessons in the art of printing, 
on which occasion he addressed to him a few 
words in a more serious strain than he had 
hitherto ever made use of to the boy. It was 
shortly after one New Year's Day, as the two 
were sitting in the back parlour after supper, 
listening to a furious storm which seemed 
ever and anon to shake the foundations of the 
house. The printer had been unusually sad 
that day, and as Arthur glanced up at him 






230 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

occasionally from gazing thoughtfully at the 
live coals, he thought he had never seen him 
looking so old. 

"Arthur," said Mr. ToUady, suddenly ,^ 
do you think I am a rich man ? " 

Not — not exactly rich," began Arthur, 
after some slight hesitation. " But — but, 
indeed, I have never thought about it at 
all." 

" I dare say you never have, for you are 
still in the happy years, Arthur, when the 
thoughts run but little on riches or poverty. 
Should you be surprised if I told you that I 
was a poor man — a very poor man ? " 

" I should be surprised if you told me you 
were very poor, sir." 

" You would? " repeated the other, smiling. 
" Would you be sorry to hear it ? " 

" Very sorry, for I am sure you do not 
deserve to be poor, sir," replied the boy with 
a proud firmness of tone beyond his years. 

There was silence for a few moments, when 
the printer began again in a grave tone. 

" I am indeed very poor, Arthur ; so poor, 
that even the slightest expenses beyond our 
mere necessaries are a great burden to me. 
Do you remember how many newspapers you 
used to take out each morning when first 
you came to me ? " 

" I think about fifty, sir." 

" Just so. And how many do yoti take 
out now ? " 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 231 

" Twenty-three, sir." 

" Just so. Can you see why I ask you 
that, Arthur ? " 

" Yes, sir," replied the boy, sinking his 
head and speaking sadly. 

" The papers used to be the best part of 
my business," pursued the old man ; ''but it 
was to the office that I looked for the greater 
part of my income. But that, too, has fallen 
off sadly during the last few years. Do you 
notice that James has not been here since 
Christmas ? " 

James was the printer whom Mr. Tollady 
had long employed in his office. Arthur 
replied in the affirmative. 

" I have been obliged to do without him, 
though it grieved me sincerely to part with 
him. I had no longer business enough to 
keep him at work, Arthur. I can manage it 
all myself now-a-days, with your help." 

" I am very sorry to hear it, sir." 

There was again silence for several 
minutes, when Arthur suddenly broke out. 

*' Then why do you let me be a burden to 
you, sir? I'm sure I don't anything like 
earn my food and the money you give me ; I 
have thought so for a long time, and wished 
to speak to you about it, but I was afraid 
you might be offended. Pray let me find 
some work somewhere I I am sure I could 
earn fifteen shillings a week, sir, and — and 
that would be a little help — though not much." 



232 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

He added the last words blushingly, as lie 
met Mr. Tollady's eye fixed upon him with 
its kindly smile. 

" Don't be ashamed of your generous 
nature, Arthur," replied the latter. " No 
doubt you could earn what you say, and 
more ; but it would be very mu6h against my 
wish. I fear I have done wrong in telling 
you all this ; you will distress yourself about 
it. No ; I said that all expenses beyond 
those necessary for our support were a 
burden ; but I am glad to say that there is 
Still no difl&culty in providing what we 
absolutely need, and, I trust, never will be. 
This is the reason I spoke to you about such 
things. You are now beginning to learn a 
business, one that has supported me for the 
greater part of my life, and which, if you 
master it thoroughly, will always stand you 
in good stead, for a first-class printer can 
always find employment. Now the very best 
way you can help me, Arthur, is to become a 
good compositor as soon as possible. Then 
you will be able to take James's place, and 
who knows but what you may bring us good 
luck. I am afraid 1 am getting too old to 
push ahead, as I ought to." 

''You shall have no reason to complain of 
me, sir," replied Arthur. " I shall not sleep 
till morning for eagerness to begin.'* 

" I wish you could bestow on me a little of 
your life and energy, Arthur," said Mr. 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 233 

Tollady, with a sigh. "It often rather 
grieves me to be able to provide no better 
field for their exercise than this musty old 
shop and office. But keep well in mind what 
I have said to you, my boy. I teach you to 
become a printer because I think that in so 
doing I shall best fulfil my duty towards you ; I 
shall have given you knowledge by which you 
can always live. Do not suppose that I think 
you capable of nothing higher; had I the 
means I would spare nothing to give you the 
best advantages in whatever profession you 
should choose ; but you see how it is with 
me. Have you done any more at your 
drawing to day ? " 

Arthur started to his feet with a joyful 
look, and ran to a corner of the room where 
a large and much-worn portfolio was leaning 
upright against the wall. This he carried to 
the table, and then laid it open. It con- 
tained a large number of drawings, on paper 
of various shapes and sizes, but at the top 
lay one on which Arthur was at present 
engaged. 

For he had not forgotten the old fondness 
which had first been awakened by the 
mendicant lodger at Mike Rumball's. Very 
shortly after he had begun to live at Mr. 
ToUady's he had recommenced his rude 
attempts on any scraps of paper which he 
found lying about, and this time, when he 
was at length discovered, he met with every 



234 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

encouragement to cultivate his taste. The' 
printer was himself not without some facility 
in the use of the pencil; or at all events 
such had once been the case ; and he now 
brought out several old sketch-books which 
he had filled years ago, and showed them to 
the delighted boy. Henceforth Arthur divided 
his leisure time pretty impartially between 
his books and his drawings, and with Mr. 
ToUady's occasional suggestions to aid his 
natural instincts, he made perceptible pro- 
gress in the art. With what scorn would he 
now have viewed that portrait of the parrot 
which he had laboured at so earnestly, and 
which he had offered with so much pride to 
his goddess, little Lizzie Clinkscales ! For, 
indeed, he began to acquire not a little facility 
in copying from pictures, or from objects 
which the printer set before him as models. 
One copy of a cut in an old Illustrated 
London News Mr. ToUady had liked well 
enough to have framed, and it now hung 
over the parlour mantelpiece — a group of 
horses with legs a trifle too long, and manes 
of astonishing luxuriance. The drawing 
which he now brought forth from the port- 
folio was a more ambitious attempt. It was 
a copy in pencil of Griotto's portrait of Dante, 
which he had found engraved in one of Mr. 
ToUady's books. The profoundly sad, and 
somewhat weird expression of the face was 
very finely caught, and expressed in a few 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 235 

bold lines whicli gave considerable promise 
for the future skill of the hand which drew 
them. 

Mr. ToUady sighed as he looked at the 
drawing. He was wishing that he had it in 
his power to provide adequate instruction for 
such exceptional talent. As he held it up in 
his hand, Arthur had left the room, and in a 
moment returned, holding something out of 
sight behind his back. He came and stood 
before Mr. ToUady with a smile on his face. 

*'What have you got there, my boy?'* 
asked the latter, answering the smile. 

" Something that I am half afraid to show 
you, sir," replied Arthur. '' I know it is 
very bad, but it is only a first trial. You 
won't make fun of it ? " 

" You know it is not my habit to make fun 
of anything well meant, Arthur." 

The boy drew his hand from behind his 
back and brought forward a small piece of 
paper on which he had made his first attempt 
m colours. It was a copy from nature of a 
sprig of holly, thickly clustered with berries. 

" Ha ! Water-colours ! " exclaimed Mr. 
ToUady. " Bravo, Arthur I very good, upon 
my word, very good ! When did you doit?" 
This morning, sir." 

Very well. Persevere, Arthur, and you 
will do something worth putting in the 
window yet. Where did you find your 
colours ? " 



a 
tt 



236 WOBEEBS IN THE DAWN. 



" I bought a blue, yellow, and red for two- 
pence, sir." 

" Why did you choose those three ? " asked 
Mr. ToUady, smiling. 

" I read the article on * Colours ' in your 
Cyclopaedia, sir, and found that those were 
the three out of which all the others were 
made." 

" Very well, Arthur. Try one or two 
more little things like this, and we will see 
whether we can find you a box of colours 
somewhere or other." 

So the days went on. Arthur had worked 
away at "case," and was making evident 
progress in the art of printing. Not that he 
took any pleasure in the work for its own 
sake ; being merely manual dexterity he very 
soon grew disgusted with it. But he never 
failed to fulfil his hours destined to this em- 
ployment conscientiously, for he knew that 
in so doing he was affording pleasure to his 
master, and had, moreover, the expectation 
of being very shortly absolutely useful to 
him. 

He had grown to be a tall, handsome boy, 
with blue eyes full of light, and a countenance 
open and glad. His surroundings were by 
no means of a joyous character, and yet such 
is the natural ardour of youth, and especially 
of youth animated by the celestial gift of 
genius, that his life at this time was, as it 
were, a continual hymn of gladness, the joy- 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 237 

ful exuberance of a lofty soul breathed 
upwards, under unseen impulses, to the 
eternal source of life and light which we feel, 
but know not. The miserable little outcast 
of Whitecross Street had, thanks to the 
strivings of his inborn spirit, assisted by the 
never-ceasing teaching of his friend and 
guardian, developed into a youth of rich 
promise, his mind already stored with no 
despicable harvest of knowledge, his heart 
throbbing with generous sympathy with all 
that is most beautiful in the world of nature 
or imagination. As he grew older he felt 
within himself the stirrings of a double life, the 
one, due to his natural gifts, comprehending 
all the instincts, the hopes, the ambitions of 
the artist ; the other, originating in the out- 
ward circumstances of his childhood, and not 
a little in the instruction directly afforded him 
by Mr. ToUady, or indirectly caught from 
the conversation of such men as Mark Chal- 
lenger and John Pether, which urged him on 
to the labours of the philanthropist, showing 
him in the terribly distinct reflex of his own 
imagination the ever-multiplying miseries of 
the poor amongst whom he lived, and paint- 
ing in entrancing hues the glories of such a 
life as his master s, self-denying even to a 
fault, bent solely on the one object of making 
the world less wretched, even though he died 
in the effort. These two distinct impulses 
seemed to grew within Arthur Gelding's 



238 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

mind with, equal force and rigidity ; he ex- 
perienced neither of them any the less for 
being more and more convinced, as he grew 
in self-knowledge, that their co-existence 
was incompatible with the perfection of 
either. To which of the two should he 
wholly devote himself? As he drew on 
towards his eighteenth year he spent many 
and many an hour in vain efforts to decide. 
Already he began to feel that this would be 
the struggle of his life, that upon the solution 
of this inward problem would depend the 
happiness of his existence. 

At times he was wholly the artist, especially 
when he had been working long at one of his 
drawings, or when he had been reading one 
of his favourite books on art, to procure him 
which Mr. ToUady had subscribed to a cir- 
culating library. His favourites were Cun- 
ningham's '* Lives of British Artists," and 
Vasari's " Lives of the Painters." These he 
read and re-read with an enthusiasm which 
set at defiance the weariness of nature and 
made night tributary to the supply of hours 
of which the day had too few. 

The second half of his nature grew strongest 
at those times when he took his weekly walk 
in Mr. ToUady's company. Sunday evening 
was invariably spent thus, when, that is to 
say, the weather was not so intolerably bad 
as altogether to forbid outdoor exercise. 
Starting from the shop about four o'clock, 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 239 

iihej would walk in a direction already agreed 
upon, and, by fetching a lengthy compass, 
regain home towards nine. On such occasions 
Mr. ToUady was more talkative than at other 
times. The exercise appeared to do him 
good, and not unfrequently in his flow of talk 
he would make mention of scenes and events 
which led Arthur to think that in his early 
days the printer must have seen a great deal 
of the world. But on his putting questions 
on this subject, or indeed on any other in the 
least personal to his companion, the result 
invariably was to turn the conversation im- 
mediately into other channels. Arthur soon 
observed this, and carefully avoided touch- 
ing upon such points, but he nevertheless 
nourished a great curiosity to know more 
of Mr. ToUady 's life, feeling sure that it 
must be interesting far beyond ordinary life 
stories. 

One of these walks Arthur ever after re- 
membered, partly on account of the energy 
and freedom with which Mr. ToUady that 
evening gave utterance to his opinions^ partly 
from an event which followed upon the walk, 
and which we shall have shortly to relate. 
The direction they had taken was City- wards. 
After crossing Smithfield Market, they passed 
along Little Britain, and over Aldersgate 
Street into Barbican. When in Smithfield, 
Mr. ToUady said, looking round with a pecu- 
liar smile — 



240 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

"You remember the associations con* 
nected with this place, Arthur, don't you ?" 

" The burning of the martyrs, you mean!'^ 

•* Just so. When you read history, don't 
fall into the error of skipping over those parts 
affecting religion as too uninteresting to hold 
your attention. To my mind, Arthur, his- 
tory of religious beliefs has always been at 
once the saddest and the most interesting of 
studies. It is nothing less than the struggle 
of the human mind from the black depths of 
ignorance and brutish fear up towards that 
glorious heritage of freedom to which, I 
cannot but believe, it is one day destined to 
attain. You can afford to smile at those 
writers who would have you reckon religious 
creeds among the injfluences which tend to 
exalt humanity. Never believe it I These 
faiths, one and all, great and small, from the 
most grovelling superstition of the cannibal 
to the purest phase of devotion nurtured in 
the mind of a Christian, trust me, they are 
nothing but remnants of the primeval dark- 
ness, clinging to man as he toils laboriously 
upwards, clinging in spite of all his efforts to 
shake them off. And woe to such as hug the 
darkness to their bosom ! " 

"Can you, then, feel no admiration for 
those men who suffered such fearful agonies 
in the cause they considered holy ? " 

** Admiration — no, Arthur; profound pity, 
if you like. Why should I admire a man 



A DOUBLE LIFE, 241 

because he knits up his bodily frame to the 
patient endurance of suffering, and all for 
the sake of error? Shake off that prejudice, 
I beg of you. Admirati'^n ! It is only the 
body that is in question, and how can I spare 
admiration for the body ? As well ask me 
to admire the porter who carries easily upon 
his head a weight which would crush me or 
you to the ground. That, too, is a wonderful 
exertion of bodily force. You will say, per- 
haps : * Never mind whether their belief was 
right or wrong ; admire it because it was so 
unshakable.' I tell you, nonsense ! There 
is no abstract merit in that. Call it pig-headed- 
ness, and will you admire it then?" 

" But," interrupted Arthur, " you do not 
actually despise them for the part they took ? " 

" Do not misunderstand me," pursued the 
other, eagerly. '' I argue merely against the 
absurd claim for admiration and reverence. 
Despise them ! No, certainly not. I despise 
absolutely no man, and simply because I 
esteem all alike as involuntary agents in the 
hands of a great power which most call 
Providence, but which I prefer to call the in- 
explicable spirit of the world. History 
pursues its path, using us as its agents for 
the working out of prescribed ends. To think 
that we men can modify those ends is the 
delusion of ignorance or of madness. Why 
then should I despise the martyrs ? They 
performed their part in history, and could 

VOL. I. E 



242 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

not otherwise. But do not ask me to 
actually admire them. Admiration I can 
only spare for those whom fate has ordained 
as instruments to advance humanity. Those 
who are so unfortunate as to represent the 
retarding forces in the life of man, I can only 
infinitely pity them." 

" Does not this lead to a state of mind in 
which one despairs of being able to benefit 
the world, and let one's hands lie idle out of 
mere fear of doing harm ? For you hold that 
we are merely agents, that we have no power 
to direct the course of human life." 

" "Wrong, Arthur. I did not say that we 
had no power to direct the course of human 
life ; but, that we have no power to direct it 
otherwise than in a certain path which has 
been fore-ordained, and which experience 
proves to us it will most certainly pursue.*' 

**Yes; but if we are sure the world is 
going to pursue this path, why trouble our- 
selves to help it on, why not sit and watch ?" 

" I will tell you, Arthur; because we cannot! 
The course of the world includes the course 
of each man's thoughts. These pursue a 
path which is fore-ordained in each individual 
case ; how, I do not pretend to say. Now, 
you who propose to me to sit down and 
watch, could you follow your own counsel ?" 

*' I certainly could not." 

" No, I am sure of it. If you could — well, 
that would be your part in the world, to be 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 243 

an obstruction, and even then you could not 
otherwise. You feel within you something 
that says : ^ Rise up, and do so and so.' You 
may choose your own way of doing it, mark; 
and this is what we mean by free-will; but 
further than that you have no choice. This 
is quite distinct from the pejity conventional 
distinctions of right and wrong, which, as the 
vulgar say, tempt one alternately. It is quite 
possible for a man to do wrong, in that con- 
ventional sense, and yet to be helping on in 
the noblest manner, and very likely uncon- 
sciously, the spirit of mankind ! " 

*' Then is this inward feeling of a duty all 
that we have to guide our actions ?" 

" Not all. We have experience. The feel- 
ing which urges you to advance the world, at 
the same time takes the form of a craving 
for knowledge ; thus affording you materials' 
for judging as to the best of many courses 
for fulfilling your life-task. In the history 
of the past you read the history of the future, 
and learn to judge of the significance of cause 
and effect." 

Talking thus earnestly they had passed out 
of Barbican into Beech Street, and so to th^i 
foot of Whitecross Street. Here Arthur sud- 
denly stood still. 

"You asked me what Smithfield was 
memorable for," he said, with a peculiar 
smile. ** Can you tell me the association 
connected with Whitecross Street ?" 



244 WOUKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

*' Do you mean tbe Debtor's Prison ?" asked 
Mr. Tollady. 

" By no means. I thmfc I have never told 
you, but this was the place where several of 
my earliest years were spent." 

Mr. Tollady looked into the young lad's 
face with a look at once of pity and curio- 
sity. 

>* Let us turn up here," said Arthur ; and 
they walked up the street. 

It was a moderately fine summer's even- 
ing, and in front of all the doors, and in the 
mouths of the courts and alleys, groups of 
people were standing talking, driven by the 
warmth oat of the pestilential air of their 
houses. Along the middle of the narrow 
street hundreds of children were playing, 
making the air resound with their laughter, 
shouts and screams. 

" I must have been like one of those," said 
Arthur; "and listen! Ha! what remem- 
brances that brings to my mind." 

Coming towards them was a band of little 
girls, hand in hand, who, as they skipped 
along, joined in a chorus, and the words 
were : 

There is a happy land, far, far away. 

Mr. Tollady, surprised at the broken tones 
in which his companion had spoken, looked 
up into his face and saw tears starting to his 
eyes. 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 245 

" Aye, aye ! " said the old man, sigliing^ 
** There had need be a happy land somewhere, 
for it is but little happiness that these poor 
creatures are fated to meet with on earth. 
* Far, far away ! ' Alas ! how far !" 

They had come to the entrance of Adam 
and Eve Court, the appearance of which was 
fouler than that of any they had yet seen. 
Dirty whitewash covered the lower half of 
the houses, such at least, as the narrowness 
of the court would permit of being seen. The 
stench which reeked into the outer street was 
overpowering. 

" There, there ! " exclaimed Arthur, ex- 
citedly. " In that very court, that very 
house, the last you can see, my father 
died!" 

Mr. Tollady said nothing, but turned away 
and walked on rapidly. His features were 
working violently with an inward emotion 
he could scarcely suppress. Arthur, hurrying 
on by his side, gave vent to one audible sob. 
On issuing into the more open neighbourhood 
of Old Street, they paused and looked around 
them once more. 

" Let us stand here for a moment,", said 
Mr. Tollady, '* and watch the faces of these 
people who go past. Is there one upon 
which vice and crime are not written as 
legibly as if put there in words ? Do not 
only look at their faces, look at their bodies 
also. Look at that old woman, scarcely three 



246 WORKBES IN THE DAWN. 

< 

feet high. What a monster of deformity f 
What generations of toil-worn, vice-blasted, 
hunger-nipped wretches has it taken to pro- 
duce a scion such as that. Do you notice 
the faces ? That lad, now. He is more than 
half drunk, but never mind. It gives him 
an advantage if anything. Have ypu not 
seen many a dog with a far more intelligent 
face ? Look at the brutal cast of his nose 
and lips, the hideous protuberance of hi& 
jaw-bones. Or that young girl, about fifteen 
years old, I suppose. Is it possible to imagine 
a more perfectly hideous countenance ? See 
the cat-like green eyes, swelling over with 
unutterable infamy ; see the hair, coarse and 
foul as mud-growth. Listen, oh, for the sake 
of humanity, listen to her words ! Nay, do 
not be ashamed, Arthur ! Better men than 
we are, are not ashamed to employ thousands 
of such, and sigh at the most, when they hear 
their talk. Look at that puppy, with a cigar 
in his mouth which will make him sick before 
he reaches the end of the street ! He is a 
draper's clerk, or something of the kind, and 
that girl with him is a miserable slave-of-all- 
work from next door, whom he is bent on 
seducing. Would the brains in that boy's 
head weigh as much as those of a cat, or be 
of equal reflecting power ? Never believe it. 
Oh, Arthur, I could die of pity for them all ! 
You have the hand and the eye of an artist. 
Paint a faithful picture of this crowd we have 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 247 

watched, be a successor of Hogarth, and give 
us the true image of our social dress, as he 
did of those of his own day. Paint thetn as 
you see them, and get your picture hung in 
the Academy. It would be a moral lesson 
to all who looked upon it, surpassing in value 
every sermon that fanaticism has ever con- 
cocted I " 

They turned homewards, and so exhausted 
was Mr. Tollady by the force of his emotions 
that for some distance he was obliged to lean 
upon Arthur's arm. 

" Is it not hideous," he continued, after 
proceeding a few moments in silence, " that 
half a nation should travel from the cradle 
to the grave in a gross darkness of ignorance 
and bodily misery such as is not surpassed by 
the condition of an old hack that toils its life 
away in the depths of a coal-mine I Let us 
disregard for the moment the absolute want 
of education for the millions of wretched 
children whose parents are either too poor 
or too careless to send them to school. [There 
were no school boards as yet in E ngland?] Let 
us assume, what one is tempted to believe in 
places such as this, that they have no intel- 
lects, and only bodily wants. Is it not hide- 
ous, I say, that places such as those courts 
off Whitecross Street should be suffered to 
exist, places where not even a litter of pigs 
could grow up healthy ? Is it not a disgrace 
to humanity that generations of servitude, aa 



248 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

real and degrading as that of the negroes, 
should be suffered to produce in the centre 
of our proudest cities a breed of men and 
women such as those we have been observing, 
absolute Calibans, for the most part, in re- 
spect of a pure type of human streni^th and 
beauty ? All my life I have given way to 
bursts of indignation at these monstrous 
scenes, and my reward has always been 
laughter and ridicule. * What is the use of 
your railing thus?' they tell me. These 
things are an absolute necessity; it is as 
absurd to charge any human being with the 
fault, as it would be to throw upon mankind 
the blame of a droughty summer or a severe 
winter. Even you, Arthur, are perhaps 
saying in your mind that I am inconsistent, 
inasmuch as I one moment advocate the 
powerlessness of man to alter the course of 
history, and the next moment rail at the 
existing state of affairs, and protest that it 
might be better. But it is not so. Who is 
it effects the changes of history, if not man 
himself, acting, as I insist, in obedience to a 
law of which he knows not the author, but 
which he cannot resist ? Now the mere fact 
that indignation, such as this, subsists in my 
bosom, and in the bosoms, I am glad to say, 
of thousands of my countrymen, is itself a 
sure sign that what we yearn for will ere long 
come about. We are the makers of history, 
Arthur, and it is the shooting of the seeds of 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 249 

future events whicli makes us restless. Only 
when the past is concerned is it foolish to say : 
* That should have happened otherwise, for 
otherwise it could not happen.' The future ^ 
is our own, and if we truly follow out those 
impulses which make our hearts burst with 
their impetuosity, we may be sure that we 
are truly working out the will of fate. There / 
may be men at this day who long for a return 
to the despotism of the Inquisition as fiercely 
as I do for unlimited freedom of conscience. 
Well, let them strive their best to gain their 
ends. It is their allotted part. I shall 
oppose them to the utmost, for I know that 
to do so is my allotted part ; but even 
in opposing them I shall understand them 
— a fact which I flatter myself will con- 
duce to some degree of charity on my 
side. No I Let them maintain that these 
horrors are a necessary condition of the 
present moment, if they please ; but never 
that we have it not in our power to alter 
them! What is a Government, forsooth? 
Will any one attempt to persuade me that 
the duties of a Government are composed 
in the narrow bounds of paltry diplomacy ; 
that the etiquette of courts should take pre- 
cedence in the minds of statesmen of a 
people's wail for food, food for body and food 
for mind ; that the only status of the poor, 
from our ruler's point of view, should be that 
of so much horse-power, to be employed 



250 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

either in the production of luxuries for the 
wealthy, or in the slaughter of hostile 
wretches, poor and ignorant as themselves ? 
But if we despair of Governments, so long 
inured to views such as these, and scarcely- 
capable of shaking them off till they feel the 
fierce fingers of the maddened populace tear- 
ing at their very throats, what shall we say 
of private wealth and influence, rotting in 
pestilential idleness, or active only in schemes 
for the still further brutalisation of the mob ? 
Did you ever reflect that there are men in 
England whose private wealth would suffice 
to buy up every one of the vile slums we 
have just been traversing, and build fresh, 
healthy streets in their place, and the men 
still remain wealthy ? To me it is one of the 
most fearful marvels of the time, that among 
such countless millionaires scarcely one arises 
in a generation actuated with the faintest 
shade of philanthropic motives, and not one 
worthy of the name of a true philanthropist. 
It is in the air they breathe, Arthur ! These 
gold-cradled monsters — monsters, verily, 
from a human point of view — have every 
seed of benevolent or large-viewed impulse 
crushed in their hearts by the weight of 
barbarous luxury heaped upon them from the 
hour of their births. By the eternal truth, 
what opportunities do tlaese men cast aside 
and neglect ? Suppose a Rothschild, with his 
millions, actuated only by the purest love of 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 251 

his fellow-creatures, only waking to do good, 
and going to rest to devise fresh plans of 
philanthropy for the morrow ! Imagine such 
a man calling into his counsels the wisest, 
the noblest, the bravest of a nation, and 
sitting down with them to devise schemes 
for the amelioration of his country ! Do not 
ask what such a man could perform, ask 
rather what he could not ! He could not 
make mankind wise, or learned, or good, in 
an instant, but what aid could he give them 
in their united struggle towards wisdom, 
learning, goodness ! What help could he 
afford in a million cases to struggling, suffer- 
ing, despairing merit ; how could he lessen 
the inmates of hospital, gaol, asylum ; 
what glorious service would he perform 
in the cause of humanity by the mere 
spectacle of such enlightened benevolence ! 
And your preachers ! I declare, I wonder 
how our preachers can walk the streets at 
the present day and not shrink in confusion 
and shame from the sights which meet their 
eyes on every hand. How many of them are 
there who in their sermons dare to speak out 
to the rich members of their congregation 
and rebuke them manfully for neglect of their 
opportunities ? Jesus of Nazareth dared to 
do it ; but then He received no payment for 
His sermons ; and they would tell you that 
He was a god, which clearly explains why He 
could be bolder than ordinary men I If I 



252 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

needed any proof, beyond that afforded by 
my reason, of the emptiness of their preten- 
sions, this listlessness and incapacity of theirs 
in the face of such problems as press upon us 
to-day, would be quite suflBcient. Priests of 
the Almighty, forsooth! Nay, rather the 
hypocritical augurs of a wasting superstition, 
the very wrecks of which will in a few more 
centuries be hidden amidst the undistinguish- 
able chaos of things that were." 

During the rest of the walk both were 
silent. Twilight was just verging into the 
darkness of a summer s night as they entered 
the house. Mr. ToUady preceded Arthur into 
the parlour, and was just taking up a box of 
matches off the table to strike a light when 
the latter, in the dim light which still came 
through the window, saw him suddenly press 
his hand against his left side and fall back, 
with a slight sigh, into an arm chair. Arthur 
called to him, but received no answer. 
Hastily striking a match and lighting a 
candle, he approached the light to the old 
man's face, and saw that it was deadly pale. 
The fit lasted but for a minute ; then Mr. 
ToUady's eyes again opened, and with a slight 
effort he rose to his feet. 

" You are ill, sir," exclaimed Arthur, in- 
sensibly falling back into the expressions of 
earlier days in his anxiety. 

" Nothing, Arthur, nothing ! " replied the 
other. ** Give me a glass of water, my dear 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 25S 

boy. There, that's all right again. It was 
nothing." 

Arthur saw that he was unwilling to speak 
of the incident, and accordingly maintained 
silence, but nevertheless it made him very 
uneasy. The action of pressing the hands 
to the heart previous to the fainting-fit had 
impressed itself on his mind, and gave him 
much matter for anxious thouo:ht durinof that 
night and for days after. But for the 
moment the weakness seemed to have passed. 
The old man appeared pei'fectly recovered 
and ate a little supper in his usual manner 
before retiring. They then parted, and Arthur 
went upstairs to his little bedroom. 

The brightness of the full moon rendered 
it unnecessary for him ta strike a light, and 
throwing open his window, for it was a little 
close in the house, he sat down to breathe the 
fresh air for a few moments. It was rather 
later than usual for him to be out of bed ; 
the clock at the Middlesex Hospital was just 
striking eleven. His brain had been excited 
by the unwonted energy of Mr. ToUady's 
conversation, and by the circumstances of the 
latter's fainting, and the cool breath of the 
night air was grateful to his forehead. For 
more^ than an hour he sat thus, thinking of a 
multitude of things. First he thought of the 
old man, of his apparently failing health, and 
of what would happen in the event of his 
dying ; and his eyes brimmed over with tears 



254 WORKEES IN THE DAWN. 

of affection as his heart warmed at the thought 
of all he owed to this noble benefactor. He 
reflected how little he used to understand 
Mr. Tollady in the earlier years of their 
acquaintance ; how, little by little, an appre- 
ciation of the beauty and serenity of his 
character had grown upon him, till to-night 
he had obtained a more complete knowledge 
than ever of all the wonderful purity and 
lofty dignity concealed beneath the every- 
day details of that simple life. Then his 
thoughts wandered to the features of his own 
mind and character, and for some minutes he 
indulged in that self-examination which is 
beyond the power of ignoble natures. He 
thought of his beloved art, and wondered 
whether he was in reality born with the 
genius of a great painter, or whether it was 
mere talent which led him to pursue that 
course so eagerly. Rapidly emerging from 
such reflections he passed into his wonted 
current of thoughts, surveying in his mind a 
long panorama of glorious pictures which he 
firmly hoped one day to execute, and the very 
imagination of which made hi? blood leap in 
its courses, and his heart swell almost to 
bursting with the fervid yearnings of a noble 
ambition. Then his dream was checked, as 
such dreams always had been of late, by the 
thought of the far different aims to which 
Mr. ToUady was always directing his atten- 
tion, whose end was a life of quiet usefulness. 



M^...^, 



A DOUBLE LIFE. 255 

sacrificing all the claims of self to active 
•exertion for the benefit of one's fellows. Was 
such a life consistent with the tumultuous 
-aspirations of the artist which so often filled 
his mind ? A vague fear seized him lest the 
two should be utterly incompatible. Yet not 
so, if he followed Mr. ToUady's advice and 
used his heart for the purposes of social re- 
form. Was not that a way out of the diffi- 
culty ? He tried to think so, but felt in the 
depths of his soul that it was not, for the art 
to which he was devoted was not the same 
in which Hogarth had excelled. He felt that 
it would be impossible for him to take up 
his pencil for the delineation of such varieties 
of hideousness. Beauty was the goddess that 
he worshipped at the inmost shrine of his 
being, and to the bodying forth of visible 
shapes of beauty his life must be devoted, or 
he must cast aside the pencil for ever. Not 
the most inspired productions of human 
genius satisfied the criterion of excellence 
which he had established for himself, not the 
majesty of Angelo, the purity of Raphael, the 
glow of Titian approached that celestial ideal 
of the beautiful which was ever before his 
thoughts ; and how should he go for his 
models to the slums and the hovels amidst 
which his wretched childhood had been 
passed ? So it was with a sigh of despair 
that he rose from the mental conflict, post- 
poning the decision, as he had so often done 



256 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

before, to a time when riper wisdom and ex- 
perience should have come to his assistance. 
Nevertheless he was unable totally to destroy 
an apprehension that the decision might never 
be reached, that the doubt and hesitation 
would form the burden of his life, and that a 
future entered upon without the ardour of 
conviction could not fail to teem with per- 
plexity and suffering. 



CHAPTER XII. 



MORE CHANGES. 



" London, 

" July 4tli, 1867. 
"My Deae Helen, 

" You are positively the most 
wretched correspondent it was ever my lot 
to encounter. Three months, and not a line. 
Papa has heard from your papa once or twice 
I believe during that time, but you had not 
the grace to enclose a line to your very re- 
spectable friend and monitress. Now this 
morning when I woke al about four o'clock 
I said to myself: 'Positively I must get a 
letter from Helen Norman to-day, and if I 
do not — well, I renounce her acquaintance 
till we meet on the shores of Styx, on which 
occasion I shall certainly find an opportunity 
of disputing precedence with her in the 
matter of embarking upon old Charon's boat/ 
And why should I be so positive of a letter 
to-day ? For no less a reason than because 
it is wy birthday ! To-day I attain the dig- 
nity of seventeen I You who are still at the 
kittenish stage of sixteen, do you not in- 
voluntarily bow before my grandeur, and 
wonder how you can have been so neglectful 

VOL. f. 8 



258 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

of your duty as to leave me ungreeted under 
such circumstances ? 

" Yes, I am seventeen. Papa has made mo a 
wonderful present, nothing less than the most 
delightful little pony you ever saw in your 
life, an absolute darling of a pony ! When he 
gave it me he said, in his usual way : * Now, 
Miss Maud, I am not throwing away money 
on you for nothing, you understand. If I go 
to the expense of buying you a pony, it is 
that you may ride about and show yourself.* 

* And why should I show myself, papa dear ?' 

* Why ? To get a husband as quickly as 
possible. Miss Gresham, of course! You 
don't think I'm going to have you upon my 
hands till you're an old maid, do you ? ' 

" That is papa's way of talking, you know. 
I really am afraid I don't quite understand 
papa sometimes. Now when he was saying 
that to me, he was so serious in face and 
tone that anyone else could not but have 
believed that he quite meant it. And yet I 
know, of course, that he was only in fun. 
The idea of my being married just yet ! Of 
course I shall be married some day, you know, 
Helen ; that I have very firmly decided in 
my own mind. But who it is to be, I am 
very far from knowing. Indeed I am not at 
all sure that I have formed an ideal yet. Let 
me see. I think the man I shall marry will 
be rather old; yes, notwithstanding your 
horror at such an idea ; I think he must be 



MOBE CHANGES. 259 

oldish. You see I am rather old for my age, 
myself, and I could never endure a husband 
who would seem to me younger than myself, 
as I am quite sure any man would do who 
was not at least thirty. Then he must be a ' 
staid and sober individual. No Romeo or 
anything of the kind will do for me. For 
you know, Helen, or you ought to know, that 
myself and Miss Lydia Languish are as un- 
like as possible. If a suitor wrote a piece of 
poetry to me, it would ruin his chance for 
ever. No ; he must be, as I said, a grave 
and sober gentleman, with not less than ten 
thousand a year, subscribing freely to public 
charities and all such useful institutions, a 
chairman at numerous committees, a member 
of Parliament, in short a highly useful man 
in every sense of the word. Ornamental he 
by no means need be, though of course I ' 
should not care to have an absolute Bruin. 
On the other hand I should detest an Anti- 
nous. In the first place I should be jealous 
of every lady he spoke to, and secondly I 
should be much too proud of him and make 
him most horribly conceited. It is my idea 
of married life to exist in a perfect calm ; all 
such things as scenes^ of any kind, I should 
avoid to the utmost. All this, I must tell 
you, is not quite original, for the husband I 
have sketched is just the kind of man that 
papa has frequently said I ought to chooso 
when the time comes. But, as I said, I have 



260 WOEKBBS IN THE DAWN. 

such dreadful difficulty iu determining, at 
times, whether papa is in earnest or not. 
' " But what a foolish girl I am to be writ- 
ing on such subjects to a mere child. No^ 
Helen, you shall not deceive me. For all 
that your portrait represents you as being as 
tall as myself and just about twenty times as 
good looking, and that your letters read as 
though written by an experienced novelist of 
I don't know how many years old, you shall 
not persuade me to consider you as more 
than a child. Remember it is not many 
months since you were sixteen, think of that 
and be humble. 

" Talking of portraits, papa has just 
finished painting mine, and — what do you 
think ? — seriously talks of sending it to the 
Academy next year ! Unfortunately it was 
too late for the present exhibition. I will 
describe the picture to you. I am sitting at 
a solitaire-board, to begin with, my right 
hand just raised in the act of moving a glass 
marble from one hole to another. My dress 
is a very light blue, and, as I am painted in 
full length, shows my taste in such matters 
very admirably. I tell papa, too, that, if he 
.exhibits the picture, he ought to charge 
^dlle. Gateau, of Regent Street, a handsome 
sum in return for the advertisement, having 
'it stated in the catalogue by whom the dress 
was made. I confess I look very creditably^ 
My fingers, to which, of course, special atten- 



MOEB CHANGES. 261 

tion is attracted, are of absolutely wonderful 
delicacy, almost transparent. Then my hair 
is a marvel of ingenuity. I did it up in' 

imitation of Miss E , the celebrated 

sing^er, and flatter myself that I improved 
upon the original. Altogether the picture 
is, I am assured, and well believe, a highly 
attractive piece of work. A gentleman last 
week offered papa two hundred pounds for 
it ! But the gentleman is not after my taste, 
though my picture seems to suit his. He is 
a great fop, and only twenty-two ! 

" Now I know what your first remarks will 
be when you read all this. You will say: 
^ What a dreadful thing to be painted in such 
a frivolous attitude ! Why not be represented 
as drawing, or reading, or at least embroider- 
ing?* Well, it was papa's choice. He always 
says that if women are not ornamental they 
are nothing, and that they should always be 
associated with the hours of relaxation, and 
not those of work. He has no belief what- 
ever in the heroic woman, laughing to scorn 
women's rights, and speaking almost as dis- 
respectfully of thsit schwdrmerei of which you 
are yourself Such an exalted instance. 

" But I must conclude, and, as usual, re- 
serve for the last paragraph the little quantify 
of sense which my letters contain. Be assured, 
dear Helen, that though papa makes fun of a 
woman's enthusiasm, I am, in reality, very 
far from doing so. Though I consider worldly 



262 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

prudence and good sense my strong point, yet 
I am by no means without moments in which I 
realise much the same feeling as those that 
you so admirably express in your, alas ! too 
short letters. I hope you take it, as I mean 
it, for one of the truest signs of my friend- 
ship that I write to you the first things that 
come into my head, leaving you to divine the 
background of serious feeling which they 
conceal. But you really must write a line. 
Surely you are not so absorbed in your 
French, and your German, and your Italian, 
and your I-don't-know-what, that you cannot 
spare a few minutes to pen a word or two ! 
Now I calculate upon a speedy reply. 

" Your loving friend, 

"Maud Geesham.'*^ 



On the morning following the despatch of 
this letter, Maud received a short note from 
her friend, enclosed in a longer letter to Mr. 
Gresham — 



" Mentone. 
" Dearest Maud, 

" I have only time to write a 
line. Papa has suddenly been taken most 
seriously ill. He caught a severe cold the 
other day by an unfortunate accident, and I 
fear this is the result. He has asked me to 
write to Mr. Gresham, begging him, if 



MORE CHANGES. 263 

possible, to come to us at once. I am afraid 
to think why he makes this request. Pray 
urge your papa to come. 

" With love, dear Maud, 

"Helen Norman." 

The letter to Mr. Gresham was written 
in most pressing terms, and admitted of no 
delay. Maud added her entreaties, and Mr. 
Gresham set off the same evening for the 
South of France. On arriving at Mentone 
he found that he had not come a moment 
too soon. Mr. Norman, it appeared, had 
been pursuing his favourite pleasure, that of 
boating, and had, through some carelessness 
or other, been capsized. He had saved him- 
self by swimming, but was almost immedi- 
ately after attacked by a most violent cold, 
which all precautions had been unable to 
prevent. This, acting upon his already al- 
most worn-out constitution, rapidly laid him 
prostrate, with little hope of ever rising from 
his bed again. In this condition the artist 
found him, so reduced that he could not stir, 
and quite unable to speak above a whisper. 
The sight of his old friend seemed to revive 
him, and in a private interview he informed 
the latter that, with characteristic procrasti- 
nation, he had put off from time to time the 
making of his will, but that he desired 
to perform the duty immediately, being con- 
vinced that he was upon his death-bed. Mr 



264 WOBKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

Gresham undertook to fulfil tlie office of 
executor, and the will was forthwitli made. 

Two hours after completing its dictation, 
Mr. Norman sank into unconsciousness, from 
which he never revived, save very partially 
for a few moments at a time. Before the end 
of the third day after his friend's arrival he 
died. 

The greater part of his property he left, of 
course, to Helen, who was to become the 
ward of Mr. Gresham, seeing that she had 
none but distant relatives on her mother's 
side, and those in very humble circumstances, 
whilst on her father's side absolutely no rela- 
tion remained living. 

Under these circumstances, Helen might 
very fairly consider herself an heiress. There 
were also legacies to Mr. Gresham and his 
daughter Maud. Last of all came an item 
very characteristic of the testator. He made 
over to his executor the sum of £5,000 in the 
3 Per Cents., with the following instruc- 
tions : — 

He desired Mr. Gresham to do his best to 
discover whether Arthur Golding was still 
living, and, if by any chance he should find 
him, to pay to him on his attaining the age of 
twenty-one the said sum. Till such date the 
interest was to be drawn by Mr. Gresham, to 
cover any expenses that might be involved 
in the search ; in the event of Arthur having 
been already discovered, might, if the exe- 



MOBE CHANGES. 265 

cutor saw [fit, be applied to his use. If by 
tlie end of the year 1876 (to leave a fair 
margin), all efforts had met with no success, 
the sum to be employed for the benefit of 
any charity to which his executor might think 
fit to devote it. 

Thus did Mr. Norman satisfy his con- 
science by bequeathing to another the per- 
formance of what he had always considered 
as a duty, and yet had never possessed suffi- 
cient energy to undertake. 

It now remained to decide with regard to 
Helen's future. The poor girl was severely 
afflicted at her father's death, and begged to 
be allowed to remain a few months at least 
amid scenes which had hitherto possessed 
such happy, and had now acquired such 
mournful associations. 

As her health seemed to advise this course 
Mr. Gresham readily acceded to the request, 
and it was arranged that Helen should live 
in the house of a very agreeable French 
family with whom she had long been ac- 
quainted. In the course of the autumn she 
was to return to England, when her future 
movements could be discussed at her guar- 
dian's house. 

Early in October Mr. Gresham returned to 
Mentone to fetch Helen back to England, 
and this time Maud accompanied him. They 
remained in the South of France about a 
fortnight, and then started back. 



266 WOBKERS IN THE DAWN. 

It was rather more than four years since 
Helen left her old home, and she had greatly 
changed in the interval. If anything, she 
had slightly the advantage of Maud Gresham' 
in height, and her excessive slimness made 
her appear even taller than she was. She 
had never been a robust child ; but during 
the last few months grief had wasted her ta 
a shadow. Her face was more beautiful than 
ever, for hers was a style of beauty which 
gained rather than lost by a marble pale- 
ness. 

As she entered Mr. Gresham's drawing- 
room in the long black dress which she had 
travelled in, and, throwing back her veil, 
disclosed a face suffused with tears and 
smiles, which the excitement of the moment 
called forth, no one could have supposed her 
younger than the very compact yet elegant 
young lady who stood at her side ; when 
they stood together it was Maud who ap- 
peared the child. 

Upon Helen's face rested a sweet serious- 
ness which bespoke a nature at once ex- 
quisitely refined, susceptible to keen emotion, 
and strong in the power of suppressing its 
outward signs when it appeared most fitting 
to withhold them from observation. Her 
forehead bore the unmistakable impress of 
thought superior to her years ; her eyes had 
a clear directness of expression which seemed 
to pierce to the truth through all barriers of 



MOBB CHANGES. 267 

form, and irresistibly claimed respect from all 
upon whom they rested ; her lips were rich 
in the grace of female modesty and tender- 
ness. Her walk had not altered ; it was, 
as it had always been, that of a queen. 
Unconscious dignity was present in every 
movement. • 

To a stranger her bearing might at first 
have appeared haughty ; those who knew her 
soon learned that this was the mere outward 
expression of a loftiness of soul which made 
itself manifest in every word she spoke and 
every act she performed. 

Maud soon discovered that a great change 
had passed over her friend's mind in the 
period since her father's death. A few 
minutes' conversation sufficed to show her 
that this was not the same Helen who had 
written such ardent letters, brimful of en- 
thusiasm for all that is beautiful, and good, 
and true. The ardour was now suppressed, 
and it was something more than grief that 
had effected the change. Maud was not long 
in discovering the explanation of this. Helen 
had become devout. 

In one of our earliest chapters we had an 
opportunity of seeing the kind of religious 
instruction which Mr. Norman was in the 
habit of affording his child as often as her 
eagerness in questioning compelled him to 
touch upon the subject. Otherwise, if not 
compelled by her curiosity, he avoided the 



268 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

subject, fearing somewhat, if the truth must 
be told, her premature power of thought and 
observation. The result of this was, that up 
to the time of her father s death Helen had 
thought little, if at all, on religious subjects. 
The fact that she had never known a mother 
doubtless contributed to make this possible, 
and the completeness with which her days 
were occupied in various studies gave her 
abundance of matter for thought in her leisure 
hours. But, as might reasonably have been 
anticipated, the suddenness of her bereavement 
acted as a powerful stimulus to those seeds 
of devotional piety which are present in the 
heart of every woman, and which usually 
receive numberless impulses by fructification 
long before the age at which Helen had now 
arrived. 

What sectarian Christians would style a 
conversion took place in her mind. Of a 
sudden she became discontented with the 
occupations of her life. It came upon her 
with the force of a revelation that she had 
hitherto lived in absolute neglect of the 
veritable end of existence, namely, devout 
prayer and praise to the all-powerful Being, 
upon whose existence she had as yet scarcely 
reflected, but whom she now conceived of, 
with all the energy of a powerful imagina- 
tion, as the distinct and personal God. 

This attitude of mind was confirmed by the 
circumstance that the French family with 



MOEB CHANGES. 26D 

whom she went to live were strictly religious. 
That their religion was Roman Catholic did 
not prevent Helen from being strongly im- 
pressed with their zealous fervour, and she 
forthwith commenced the performance of 
the duties of her faith with an ardour which 
marked her conduct whatever she under- 
took. 

Her friends, who had long known her in- 
timately, clearly observed the change, and 
were inspired with an eager hope that it 
might be the means of affording them the 
power of converting her to their own faith. 
To this end they forthwith began unobtru- 
sively to exert themselves, and also secured 
the aid of a cure in their self-imposed 
task. 

But the girl remained firm against their 
persuasions, which even had the result of 
rendering her more ardent than ever in the 
cultivation of her Protestantism. Her days 
were passed in the perusal of religious books, 
in self-rebuke for her sins of omission and 
commission in the past, in the contemplation 
of a future to be devoted to charitable deeds; 
whilst her nights were passed in prayer, the 
early dawn sometimes finding her still upon 
her knees, or bending over her Bible. 

No wonder, under such circumstances, 
that she grew thin and pale. The old child- 
like enthusiasm had by this time well-nigh 
forsaken her ; her excess of zeal compelled 



270 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

her to look with disapproval on the subjects 
which had occasioned it. The energy of 
her nature now exhaled in ecstasies which 
noue were witness of, save her midnight 
lamp. 

Mr. Gresham and his daughter agreed in 
fitrongly condemning this state of affairs, and 
before many days had passed began to unite 
in an attack upon what they esteemed Helen's 
self-destructive asceticism. They knew well 
that to attack it openly would only defeat 
their own object, so they proceeded by means 
of distractions to which Helen could scarcely 
refuse to consent without appearing un- 
grateful. 

They arranged excursions into the country, 
in which they were joined only by one or two 
quiet friends; they spent mornings all to- 
gether in the museums and the art-galleries ; 
they induced Helen to read aloud occasion- 
ally in the evening from books which Maud 
knew had once been favouritse of hers, and 
Mr. Gresham began to give her lessons in 
oil-painting. 

Concession in these particulars at first 
caused the pious girl acute pain, and many 
secret hours were spent in tears after some 
unusual backshding; but by degrees the 
remedy began to prove effectual, and those 
who practised it were rewarded by seeing a 
very gradual, but still very evident, improve- 
ment in Helen's spirits, an improvement 



MOEB CHANGES. 271 

whicli before long began to affect her bodily- 
health. 

Helen had at length become so far weaned 
from her habits of solitude as to voluntarily 
request that she might pay a visit to Bloom- 
ford. She had in reality secretly longed to 
see the place of her birth ever since she had 
been in England ; and now that the spring 
had once more come round, she was quite 
unable to resist the vivifying influence of the 
fresh west winds and the attractions of all 
those green country scenes, which the sight 
of the parks coming into life, again called so 
strongly to her mind. As the distance was 
comparatively short, it was arranged that 
Helen and Maud should undertake the 
journey alone, going early in the morning 
and returning the same evening. 

At about eleven o'clock they found them- 
selves before the gates of the Rectory. The 
house had not altered in outward appear- 
ance ; but a group of young children play- 
ing, or rather squabbling, together on the 
lawn, reminded the visitors of the change in 
its occupancy. Passing up the walk, they 
rang the door bell and requested to see Mr. 
Whiffle. 

They were shown into the drawing-room, 
which was furnished precisely as Mr. Norman 
had left it, but which was scarcely as tidy as 
it might have been, and as it always was in 
the days of Mrs. Cope's dominion. 



272 WORKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

Whilst waiting for the rector's appear- 
ance Helen kept her veil down, and Maud 
could hear her in vain endeavouring to sup- 
press a sob, occasioned by the memory of old 
times. She had just time to give her friend's 
hand a reassuring pressure when Mr. Whiffle 
entered. 

He looked shorter than ever, probably 
because he had begun to contract a some- 
what portly habit of body, and his hair was 
just as red and just as stubborn as ever. He 
wore spectacles now, and strutted about with 
a more dignified gait than he had previously 
exhibited ; but he still retained the old habits 
of running his fingers through his coarse red 
hair, and of rising and falling on his toes as 
he discoursed. His voice had acquired a 
slightly nasal twang, probably due to attempt- 
ing to make his crow-like note subservient 
to the purposes of intonation. 

On entering the room he bowed, and re- 
quested to be informed in what way he could 
serve his visitors. 

Maud was somewhat more prepared for a 
speech than Helen, and accordingly re- 
plied — 

" We are two old acquaintances, sir, who, 
Imuch fear, have outgrown your recollec- 
tion. Of me you had never more than a 
slight knowledge ; but my companion is a 
very old friend of yours, indeed. Her you 
will probably recognise." 



MOBE OHANGES. 273 

The rector gazed in a puzzled manner 
from the speaker to Helen and back again, 
and for some moments was entirely at a loss. 
But the sight of Helen's mourning seemed at 
length to stimulate his memory, and his face 
gradually brightened as the idea gained 
power over his mind. 

" Upon my word ! — Ha ! — No ! — Yes ! It 
must be. I do believe this is Miss Norman ! 
And this — ? Upon my word I cannot recol- 
lect." 

" You are right as far as I am concerned, 
Mr. Whiffle," said Helen, who had now re- 
covered her self-possession. "And this is 
Miss Gresham, whom you several times saw 
at the Rectory." 

*' Upon my word, and so it is ! Miss 
Gresham, I am heartily glad to see you. Miss 
Norman, you have delighted me by this visit ! 
Ladies, I beg you to consider yourselves both 
heartily welcome to Bloomford Rectory. 
Upon my word ! This is One of my hap- 
piest days since that eventful one upon 
which I entered The Church 1 You have 
experieuced a sad loss. Miss Norman, a 
very sad loss ; but I feel sure that I need not 
remind the daughter of my sometime rector, 
whom I ever loved and revered, of the con- 
solations which The Church offers for those 
similarly afflicted. And you have come down 
from Town, I suppose. Ha ! I get to Town, 
myself, more frequently than I used to do, 

VOL. I. T 



274 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

Miss Norman, in the by-gone days. You 
see, it behoves the pastor of a congregation 
to keep his mind thoroughly in contact with 
the movements of the day. I was in London, 
in fact, so recently as three weeks ago, when 
I had a little business in Paternoster Row, 
concerning the publication of a small pam- 
phlet on the subject of " Church Ritual," a 
reply to certain calumnies which have of late 
been circulated with regard to my method of 
conducting our services in S. Peter's. I 
trust. Miss Norman, you favour the High 
Church form of worship ?" 

^^I have been so long abroad," replied 
Helen, after a moment's hesitation, " that I 
doubt whether I am quite aware of the dis- 
tinctions existing between the different forms 
of worship in England." 

" Indeed I Ha I We must discuss the 
whole matter. You will, of course, take 
dinner with us ? We dine at one." 

" We shall have pleasure in doing so," re- 
plied Helen. 

" Ha ! Delighted ! Upon my word, I must 
call Mrs. Whiffle — and the children. They 
will all be charmed !" 

So saying, the Rector hurried out of the 
room. In a moment a confused whispering, 
and shuffling, and pushing, and whimpering 
began to be audible in the drawing-room, 
which seemed to indicate that the whole 
Whiffle family was already gathered outside 



MORE OHANGBS. 276 

in the hall. A moment after a baby set up 
a terrific screaming, whereupon, as at a 
signal, Mr. WhiflBe again marched into the 
room, with Mrs. Whijffle leaning on his arm, 
followed by nine children, the eldest girl 
bearing an infant in her arms. In the midst 
of agonising yells from this youngest member 
of the family circle, Mr. Whijffle introduced 
them all to the visitors. 

" This is Master Peter," he concluded, 
taking the squalling brat in his arms, " so 
called because born on the day sacred to St. 
Peter, the patron of the church of which I 
have the honour to be rector. He is our 
latest arrival, and as yet somewhat of a care 
to Mrs. Whiffle. I often pity those people. 
Miss Norman, who have large families. The 
care of even a few children is something of 
which you, happily, can as yet form no con- 
ception. Augustus, my eldest, is not here, 
being at present a student at King's College, 
London, where he is preparing for the time 
when he shall have attained the years neces- 
sary for ordination." 

There was something peculiar in Mr. 
Whiffle's tone, when he spoke of his eldest 
son, which might have led an acute observer 
to surmise that he was not altogether satis- 
fied with that young gentleman's progress. 
But the thoughts of his visitors were else- 
where, and they did not notice this. 

All through dinner Mr. Whiffle talked in- 



276 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

cessantly, expatiating on the details of the 
discussion going on between himself and a 
neighbouring vicar on the subject of hia 
ritualism. With merciless detail he described 
the points at issue in the contest, went back 
for his authorities to the early ages of the 
Church, gave citations in Latin which he did 
not take the trouble to translate, described 
diagrams on the table with knives and forks to 
represent the Church ornaments of which he 
was speaking, and in short gave the young 
ladies an insight into the foundations of 
ritualism calculated to send them back home 
somewhat wiser than they came. And all 
this amidst such a hubbub of juvenile 
chatter, such a breaking of plates and over- 
turning of glasses, such a thumping, and 
squalling, and threatening, as would inevit- 
ably have driven anyone but Mr. Whiffle 
frantic when engaged in the discussion of 
such engrossing topics. 

Maud and Helen did their best to appear 
interested in all this talk, and with such 
success, that Mr. Whiffle was jubilant. 

** I must take you into my study," he ex- 
claimed, as they all rose from the dinner 
table, *' and show you certain works which I 
have in progress, works which I flatter my- 
self will open the eyes of certain degenerate 
sons of The Church, whom I could name, and 
may perchance make the name of Orlando 
Whiffle somewhat more widely known than 



MORE OHANQES. 277 

it at present is. Ahem ! I have in contem- 
plation, Miss Norman, amongst other things, 
a series of Tracts not unlike those issued by 
the Tractarian Party during the years 1833 
to 1841. I have likewise pamphlets on hand 
on very various topics, among them — this 
way, if you please. Miss Gresham — treatises 
on ' The Orthodoxy of Stained Glass Win- 
dows,' * Pews or Stalls ? ' * Confession from 
the Point of View of Expediency,' * Inter- 
pretations of the Thirty-nine Articles,' and 
many others of a similar description. I 
really must get you to read a few, Miss Nor- 
man, and give me your opinion on them; 
likewise you Miss Gresham. You can have 
but little notion of the way in which work 
accumulates in the hands of a rector, or 
parson, as perhaps he should be more 
properly called : persona ecclesicSj the repre* 
sentative of The Church, a proud title, Miss 
Norman." 

They were now in the study, the room in 
which Helen had sat day after day at her 
lessons with her father. In those days it 
had been always in the most admirable order, 
at present it was rather in " admired dis- 
order." Books of all shapes and sizes were 
recklessly piled upon the shelves, and heaped 
upon the tables or the floor. There was 
scarcely a chair free to sit down upon. Every- 
where was a litter of torn manuscript, old 
numbers of Church magazines, daily and 



278 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

weekly papers, tracts by the thousand, even 
the backs of books which had been rent off 
in the struggle for existence. Certainly the 
dust could never have been once removed 
during the four years of Mr. Whijffle's incum- 
bency. Maud could not repress a smile as 
she looked round ; Helen with difficulty re- 
pressed a tear. 

" I wish I had an opportunity. Miss Nor- 
man, of directing your reading. You intend 
to remain in England now ? Ah ! I certainly 
should advise it. Nowhere have you the 
benefit of such an enlightened movement in 
the matter of Church ritual as our country at 
present enjoys. Now suppose I were to 
suggest a few books for your perusal, Miss 
Norman, sterling works which you can easily 
obtain in London, works of sound, practical 
information. Here is a piece of paper, Miss 
Norman, and a pencil ; possibly you would 
like to take the names of a few. Now here, 
for instance is Kogers's * Practical Arrange- 
ment of Ecclesiastical Laws,' containing very 
much that is absolutely necessary to be 
known ; here is Hook's * Ecclesiastical 
Biography,' an extremely interesting work; 
here, again, is Lathbury on * The History 
of Convocation,' very needful. You have 
got Lathbury ? Here, now, is Palmer's 
^ Origines Liturgicae,' which I am sure you 
will enjoy. Here we have Maskell's 
* Ancient Liturgy of the Church of Eng- 



MORE CHANGES. 279 

land,' very sound. Grot Maskell, Miss Nor- 
man ? Here are the * Monumenta Ritualia 
EcclesiaB Anglicanae/ admirable ; don't omit 
that. Here is Neale's * Tetralogia Liturgic89.' 
Possibly those might be enough to begin 
with, and when you have perused them if 
you would so far honour me as to intimate 
the fact by letter, or, still better, by coming 
down again to see me, I will have another 
list assorted. By-the-bye, you might of 
course add Burn's * Ecclesiastical Law,' a 
compendious work." 

At this moment Mrs. Whiffle appeared in 
the doorway. 

** My dear," she said, '' here's that man 
Potts come again about the burial of his 
child. He says he must see you." 

*' Ah ! Does he? Well, show him in 
here. A ygvj refractory parishioner, young 
ladies. You shall see how I will deal with 
him." 

The man thus announced then appeared at 
the door. He was a rude countryman in 
labour-stained clothes, and with a sun-burnt 
face. The latter, however, was marked by 
signs of suffering, and Helen noticed that the 
hat he held in his hand was bound with a 
scrap of black ribbon. 

" Well, my man ?" asked Mr. Whiffle, as 
he appeared. 

" Well, sir," replied the man, pulling his 
forelock respectfully, " I's come to ask 



280 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

whether you won't be so good as bury our 
little Tom. ' It 'ud be a great kindness, sir, 
if you only would, this one time, an' we 
shouldn't forget it so quick, neither." 

** I told you this morning. Potts," replied 
Mr. Whiffle, with dignity, "that it is im- 
possible for me to read the service of the 
Church of England over your child, seeing 
that he was never baptized. Is not that 
enough?" 

" Well, sir, if you can't see your way to do 
it, would you let Mr. Sykes do it, the one as 
preaches at t' chapel, you know? He's a 
Dissenter I know, but he's got no 'bjections 
to do this bit o' kindness for us, and we'd 
rather have him than no one. I'm sure as 
it'll kill his mother if our poor little Tom, as 
never did no 'arm to no one, no not a fly, is 
put into t' ground like a dog, without Christian 
burial. Would you let Mr. Sykes read over 
him, sir ?" 

At the first mention of the obnoxious 
schismatic, Mr. Whiffle's eyebrows had risen, 
and his eyes actually glared through his 
spectacles at the audacious speaker. 

"Mr.— Mr.— Mr. Sykes!" he stuttered, 
scarcely able to speak. " Allow him to read 
a service in a burial ground belonging and 
appertaining to the English Church as by law 
established ! I'll see Mr. Sykes in — his pul- 
pit first ! I tell you the child must be buried 
in silence, Potts, so there's no use in further 



MORE OHANGBS. 281 

discussion. The ordinances of The Church 
do not permit me to read the service in such 
cases. Do I not know the ordinances of the 
Church in which I am a rector ? Do you 
wish to insult me, man ?" 

" I's no wish to hinsult you, sir, or any 
one else," returned the man, " but I think 
it hard, that's all I's got to say ; I think it 
hard, I do ! It'll be the death of my poor 
wife, I know as it will ; an' it's a blow for 
me myself. But I s'pose I must bide it. 
Well, sir, it's a queer Christian Church, that's 
all I's got to say, an' what's more — " 

" Now that will do, Potts," broke in Mr. 
Whiffle, majestically, pointing to the door. 
** You've heard my answer, and you may go. 
Any attempt to infringe my rights as rector 
of the parish of Bloomford will meet with 
condign punishment; that's all /have to say, 
Potts. You may go." 

The man retired with a terribly downcast 
look, far too sad at heart to give ear to the 
scorn with which his rector treated him. 

" This seems very hard for these poor 
people," said Helen, as soon as he was gone. 
*' Surely the severity of such a rule must 
sometimes be relaxed." 

''I grant you it is sometimes neglected, 
Miss Norman," returned the rector, " by 
those who have but an imperfect sense of 
their own dignity and their duty to The 
Church." 



282 WOEKBRS IN THE DAWN. 

He was proceeding to a long discussion on 
the subject of Church ordinances when he 
was again interrupted by the presence of 
Mrs. WhiflBe at the door, who requested ta 
speak with him for a moment. Mr. WhiflBe 
was absent for a few minutes, when he 
returned and announced that his eldest son^ 
Augustus, had quite unexpectedly made his 
appearance at the Rectory. His face, when 
he made this announcement, once more pre- 
sented the mingled expression which it had 
worn when he first spoke of his son. Im- 
mediately after, the young man himself 
appeared in the study. 

The outward aspect of Augustus "WhiflBe 
was scarcely that which we are accustomed 
to associate with a student of divinity. His 
dress was decidedly "loud" intone, cut in 
the extremity of the existing fashion, and 
the ornaments which he wore were in ex- 
cessively bad taste. In short he precisely 
resembled the typical counter-man out for a 
holiday. In person he was very tall, with 
a face in which it was difl&cult to determine 
whether folly or vice predominated, and hi& 
hair, though kept in strict order by means 
of a liberal allowance of bear's grease, was 
of exactly the same hue as his father's. 
He wore a gold pince-nez^ had his hands 
covered with flashy rings, and carried a de- 
monstrative cane, with which, as he stood in 
the doorway, he tapped his shiny boots, as if 



MOEB CHANGES. 283 

to draw attention to their exquisite finish. 
Such was Mr. Augustus Whiffle, whom his 
reverend parent had destined to become a 
shining light in the Establishment. It was 
far from improbable that he might even yet 
attain to that distinction. 

On being introduced to the young ladies, 
this young gentleman bowed with a mixture 
of superciliousness and awkwardness gene- 
rally observable in those men who are won't 
to spend a considerable portion of time in the 
society of females who neither exact nor 
receive any great amount of deference. He 
muttered a few remarks with regard to the 
weather, and something to the effect that it 
was a long time since he had seen either of 
the visitors, after which he beat an awkward 
retreat, almost overturning his mother, who 
had stood behind him with an expression of 
countenance which seemed to indicate that 
she scarcely knew whether to admire or sigh 
over her son's appearance and behaviour. 

Augustus having disappeared, Mrs. Whiffle, 
with a look of intelligence at her husband, 
invited the young ladies to take a stroll in 
the garden, which being agreed to, they all 
three went out on to the lawn, accompanied 
by the nine young Whiffles. Scarcely were 
they gone than Augustus Whiffle again made 
his appearance in the study, where his father 
had been thoughtfully awaiting him. He 
closed the door behind him, and assumed the 



284 WOBKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

only vacant chair, cocking his hat on one 
side, and assuming the greatest possible 
extent of space for his legs, one of which, 
with an affectation of careless grace, he flung 
over the other, all the time continuing to tap 
his boots with his cane. 

" Well, sir," began Mr. Whiffle, with a 
make-believe severity which his tremulous 
tones belied, ** I thought I had expressly- 
forbidden you to absent yourself from your 
duties again before the long vacation ?" 

" Very possibly," returned Augustus, 
drawing a gilt toothpick from his waistcoat 

Eocket, and applying it to his teeth, which 
e smacked loudly with his tongue. '*But 
if you tell a fellow to go and live in the 
society of other fellows, who are gentlemen, 
you must give a fellow the means to be a 
gentleman too ! " 

** What do you mean, sir ?" asked the 
rector, still severely, though his hands were 
nervously twitching behind his back. 

" I mean what I say. A fellow can't live 
like a gentleman unless he has the means ! " 

** Do you mean to tell me you have again 
run short of money ?" 

Augustus smacked each one of his pockets 
in turn — and he had a great number of 
them — but did not deign to make further 
reply. 

"And what has become of the thirty 
pounds you had at Easter, sir ? Where — • 



MORE OHANGES. 285 

where are your accounts? Show me an 
account of your expenditure ?" 

** Don't keep any," returned the other, 
coolly, changing the position of his legs. 

" And why not, sir, when I so expressly 
instructed you to ?" 

*' Devilish ungentlemanly. No fellow that 
calls himself a gentleman keeps accounts/' 

" Indeed ! And you swear too, sir I Is 
that indispensable to a gentleman ?" 

" Deucedly prevalent habit," replied 
Augustus, with a sarcastic smile. 

Mr. Whijffle turned away from his son and 
made an attempt to pace the room in thought, 
but at the first turn he tripped over a folio 
and had difl&qulty in recovering himself with 
dignity. Augustus continued to pick his 
teeth and smile. 

" I tell you what it is, sir ! " exclaimed 
the rector, suddenly, in exasperation, 
** you'll have no more money from me till 
the long vacation comes — not a penny ! And 
what's more, if you show your face again at 
the Rectory before that period, I will give 
orders that you are not to be admitted. You 
shall be turned away like a beggar from the 
door, sir!" 

" Very well," replied Augustus, rising. 
" Then I shall at once throw up the College, 
and look out for something that'll bring in 
the needful. In the meantime I shall live on 
tick, and you*ll have the bills." 



286 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" I'll write to your lodgings immediately, 
sir," cried Mr. Whiffle, in wrath, "and 
warn them to turn you out of doors to- 
morrow ! " 

"No difficulty in the world in finding 
another place. Lots of gentlemanly fellows 
that will go bail." 

"I will forbid you to come near the 
Rectory again, as long as you live I You 
shall no longer be in any way related to me ! 
I'll advertise in the newspapers, and warn 
tradesmen against trusting you ! " 

" Oh no, you won't — by no means I " 

" Why not, sir ? " 

" Because you don't care to make yourself 
ridiculous. Now what is the good of calling 
a fellow over the coals in this way ? You 
know a fellow can't get on without tin, and 
as long as you've got it, why not let a fellow 
have a reasonable supply ?" 

Mr. Whiffle wrung his hands in despera- 
tion. 

" What have you done with all your money, 
Gus ?" he asked, in a tragi-comic tone, which 
he, however, meant to be perfectly serious. 

''Well, a good lot's gone in books," replied 
Augustus, who, it must be confessed, had 
very much the air of a studious youth. 
" They come so devilish high, you see." 

" Don't swear in my presence, sir I " ex- 
claimed the rector, stamping his foot. " What 
books have you bought ?" 



MORE CHANGES. 287 

" Oh, I don t know. All sorts." 

If this was meant to comprise a copious 
collection of very bad novels, it was certainly- 
true. 

*^ Have you got through the * Origines 
LiturgicsB ' yet ?" asked the rector, after a 
pause, his wrath, never of long duration, 
perceptibly cooling. 

" Very nearly," replied Augustus, who had 
never opened the book. 

" You have ! " exclaimed the credulous 
father, in delight. " Ha ! Let me ask you 
a few questions." 

'*Well, I'm sorry," returned the young 
man, pulling out his watch, " but I really 
haven't time. I must positively get back to 
Town to-night. I have a lecture early to- 
morrow morning." 

"Go back with Miss Norman and Miss 
Oresham," said the rector. " They go by 
the 5.30." 

" Not a bad idea," replied Augustus, who 
felt rather uneasy at the prospect, for all 
that. ** And, by-the-bye — did you write the 
cheque ?" 

Mr. Whijffle looked at his son, sighed, 
paused a moment, then left the room and 
returned very shortly with a folded cheque 
in his hand. 

" Augustus Whijffle," he said, solemnly, as 
he handed it over. " This is the last money 
I can let you have before the long vacation. 



288 



WORKERS IN THE DAWK. 



As it is, I shall have to pinch myself and the 
children. There, take it, and make a proper 
use of it." 

Augustus unfolded the cheque and glanced 
at it. 

" Only twenty ! " he exclaimed. " 1 say, 
governor, you're getting awfully shabby, you 
know." 

At this moment the tea-bell made its 
clanging heard in the hall, and Mr. Whiffle, 
glad of an excuse, hurried away. Augustus 
followed, inserting the cheque in his pocket- 
book. 

" What the devH's the good of this ?" he 
muttered to himself. " Won't pay a twentieth 
part of a fellow's debts, let alone keeping a 
fellow in toggery and cigars. What an old 
screw the governor is ! " 



CHAPTER XIII. 



EMANCIPATION. 



The journey home that night, as Mr. WhifHe 
had suggested, was travelled in the company 
of the divinity student, who, as soon as he 
had succeeded in vanquishing to some degree 
his awkward bashfulness, entertained the 
young ladies with descriptions of sundry 
adventures which he had at various times ex- 
perienced in the company of congenial spirits, 
always denominated as "fellows." Maud 
listened with a well-affected interest, partly 
because she was in reality amused by the 
character being displayed before her, partly 
because Maud always paid deference to the 
convenances^ and would not even have ap- 
peared rude to a chimney-sweep. Helen sat 
with her veil lowered, in absolute silence. 
She was unwilling to betray the disgust which 
she felt, but at the same time quite incapable 
of affecting an interest which she did not 
feel. 

" I say. Miss Norman," exclaimed 
Augustus, at one point in the conversation, 
or rather monologue, " it seems an awful time 
since we used to know each other so well> 
don't it ?" 

VOL. I. W 



290 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

" It does indeed seem a long time since I 
left Bloomford," replied Helen. 

The quiet, ladylike tone of her voice, 
having nothing in the least childish about it, 
somewhat repressed the young man's con- 
versational ardour. He gnawed the top of 
his cane for a moment, then renewed the 
attack. 

" I say. Miss Norman, you remember the 
old parrot and the cat we used to laugh at ? '* 

" Very well," replied Helen. " The parrot 
still lives. I have brought her back to Lon- 
don with me." 

"I say, now! Think of that! It 'ud 
puzzle a fellow's brains now to calculate that 
old beast's age ; wouldn't it. Miss Norman ? '* 

" The bird must be very old." 

** I say, Miss Norman," pursued the un- 
daunted Augustus, after a little more gnaw- 
ing of his cane, " do you remember that 
rummy little fellow that lived at the Rectory 
with you once — a rummy-looking cove, that 
bolted one morning, you know ? " 

" I remember him, quite well." 

" I say, did you ever hear any more of him. 
Miss Norman ? He used to have lessons from 
the governor, I remember." 

" He was never heard of, I think," replied 
Helen, 

" What a rummy go ! Drowned, I always 
said/* 

Helen made no reply, and Augustus, after 



EMANCIPATION, 291 

in vain endeavouring to renew the conversa- 
tion, again turned to Maud, whose attention 
he continued to engage to the end of the 
journey. At the station he assisted his com- 
panions into a cab, and lingered about the 
door with some wild notion that he might be 
invited to accompany them home. Being 
deceived in his hope he walked away some- 
what disconsolate ; but rapidly recovering his 
spirits, as he reflected on the brilliant con- 
versational powers he had exhibited, he 
forthwith made for the lodgings of a certain 
" fellow," in whose company he spent the 
greater part of his time, and proceeded to 
detail in confidence the circumstances of 
his tete-a-tete which he professed to have held 
that afternoon with the charming daughter of 
"an awfully rich old cuss," the termination 
of which had been the acceptance of an offer 
of his heart and hand. On the strength of 
this, the pleasant " fellow " in question, who 
did not believe a word of the story, made 
bold to borrow a sovereign, which Augustus 
was ashamed to refuse, but the sure and cer- 
tain loss of which he bitterly regretted. 

" Well, Helen," said Mr. Gresham, as the 
three sat together the same evening, " how did 
you find Bloomford ? " 

"Very much changed I thought, Mr. 
Gresham," replied the girl, 

" Or was the change in yourself, do you 
think ? " pursued the artist. 



292 WOBKBBS IN THE DAWN. 

" Possibly a little, but certainly not alto- 
gether/* 

" How was it changed ? " 

" Bloomford itself was as beautiful as 
ever," replied Helen, with some appearance of 
reluctance, " but the Rectory I scarcely re- 
cognised as my old home." 

"Ha! Has Mr. Whiffle been making 
alterations?" asked Mr. Gresham, who per- 
fectly understood Helen's meaning, but had 
a perverse delight in drawing her into more 
definite expressions. 

" Oh, no ; at least none that I noticed. 
I — I can scarcely say how it was changed. I 
think it is hardly as quiet and homelike as it 
used to be. There — there are many children 
about." 

" You went into the church, of course ?" 

" No," replied Helen, sinking her head. 

" Not ! Now that was a pity. According 
to all accounts. Mr. Whiffle has made some 
charming alterations. I believe it is almost 
as pretty as a theatre," he added, carefully 
watching Helen from beneath his heavy eye- 
brows. 

'* I feared it," she replied, in a low voice, 
adding almost immediately, " I feel rather 
tired after tlie journey. Will you permit mo 
to leave you to-night ? " 

'' Certainly, Helen. You must not overtire 
yourself. Good-night." 

Helen rose in her wonted graceful manner. 



EMANCIPATION. 293 

shook hands with her guardian, kissed Maud, 
and left the room with a firm step, yet so 
light that it could not be heard. 

Mr. Gresham was silent for a moment after 
her departure, apparently engaged in reading 
a periodical. Maud continued to work at a 
pencil-drawing which had held her attention 
from the foregoing conversation. 

"Pallas seems a trifle out of sorts to- 
night," said the former at length, throwing 
down his paper and speaking in the tone he 
usually adopted with his daughter, a half 
serious, half trifling tone very well adapted 
to the sceptical character of his remarks. 

"Why do you call her Pallas?" asked 
Maud, quickly. 

" Is she not in eye, in gait, in mien a young 
Pallas Athene ? Let me tell you, Maud, if 
you practised before your glass a couple of 
hours a day you could never acquire the 
graceful dignity which Helen has from 
nature." 

" It is very unlikely that I should ever 
make the attempt," replied Maud saucily. 
" But if I lack dignity I suppose I have 
something to make up for it. If Helen is 
Pallas Athene, what am I ? " 

" Neither Here nor Aphrodite, child, but 
just plain Maud Gresham ; a girl not too 
pretty to be useful, not too witty to be talked 
to by a plain man of the world, and far from 
possessing too much reverence for the good- 



294 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN, 

natured father who spoils her, like a fool a& 
he is. You are not much like your mother, 
Maud." 

" So you often say, papa." 

" She was an angel, which you — I hope — 
are far from being ; and the only mistake she 
ever made was in visiting earth to marry a 
man who had always been sceptical with re- 
gard to the existence of supernatural beings ! 
You, I am glad to say, Maud, are decidedly of 
the earth earthy." 

*' You are not flattering, papa." 

" I never am, my dear. But to return to 
our muttons. Why is Pallas out of sorts ? " 

" Can't you guess ? " 

" Possibly I can, but I wish for your 
opinion." 

" I will give it you then, papa. She went 
to Bloomford with a mind full of images 
of her past life, images which a re- 
flection from the happiness of childhood 
made to glow with an unnatural splendour. 
I think the appearance of the country dis- 
appointed her a little, after the scenes she 
has been accustomed to, but still more the 
people she saw there. She expected,. 
I fancy, to behold her ideal of a country 
clergyman, an exalted combination of 
Chaucer's and Goldsmith's good parsons. In- 
stead of that she found a — but you know 
Mr. Whiffle, papa." 

" Never mind, Maud. What did she find ? '^ 



EMANCIPATION. 295 

asked her father, regarding her with a mali- 
cious shyness. 

" I say, you know Mr. Whiffle, papa, or, 
at all events, once knew him." 

" And I say never mind. Miss Gresham. 
What did she find ? " 

" Well, if you will have me say it, a ridi- 
culous old busy-body, possessed of about as 
much common-sense and good-feeling as the 
hassock he kneels upon, and as much entitled 
to the epithet of reverend as — as I am." 

"You progress in the art of epigram, 
Maud," said her father, looking rather 
pleased. " Did old Whiffle discuss the Rubric 
at large ? " 

" He favoured us with not a few remarks 
thereon." 

** And Pallas appeared disgusted ? " 

" Supremely so." 

" Pained, too, no doubt, poor child. How- 
ever, I hoped it would happen so. A few 
more visits to a few more such parsons and 
she would be almost cured of her mania, I 
fancy." 

" You speak too disrespectfully of Helen, 
papa. Her convictions are independent of 
such influences as those." 

" You think so ? Why, you are becoming 
an idealist all at once, Maudie." 

" I have much more of the idealist in my 
temperament than you dream of, papa," re- 
turned the young lady, rising with a smile. 



296 WOEKEES IN THE DAWN. 

" Pray don't think I am so sunk in the mud 
of scepticism as you are." 

" Ho, ho ! What are your ideals, Maudie ? '* 
cried Mr. Gresham, with jocose mockery. 

"A calm domestic life, in which the 
passion of love interferes as little as that of 
hate ; and at the end of it a sudden, unan- 
ticipated and painless death." 

Mr. Gresham looked up at his daughter with 
something of natural surprise, not being quite 
sure whether she were in earnest or not. 
She seemed to be so. 

" I tell you what it is. Miss Gresham," he 
returned, as he rose from his chair, " I shall 
begin to fear presently that I have been 
nurturinga species of female Mephistopheles. 
Do you entertain any opinions on the subject 
of patricide ? " 

" The subject has not yet come within my 
thoughts," returned the girl, with a slight 
shrug. 

" Indeed I When you begin your specula- 
tions thereon perhaps you will be so good as 
to favour me with notice of the fact. The 
prospect of being kept rather too long out of 
her inheritance might excite curious designs 
in the mind of such a very idealistic young 
lady." 

" Oh, don't fear, papa," called out Maud, 
as they parted at the door. " When the time 
comes, your death shall be as painless as that 
I hope for myself." 



EMANCIPATION. 297 

During the next few weeks Helen lived an 
extremely retired life. Mr. Gresliam had 
assigned to her use an elegant little parlour, 
and from this she sometimes did not stir from 
morning to night, having the slight meals she 
partook of brought to her there. 

In music, as indeed in everything she had 
undertaken, Helen showed precocious talent, 
and, on the few occasions when she was in- 
duced to play before strangers, manifested a 
taste and skill which filled her hearers with 
admiration. Mr. Gresham had procured her 
an excellent teacher, and those hours which 
were iiot devoted to solitary reflection wore 
now usually spent in practice at her own 
piano. In music she found almost her only 
relief from the pressure of those distressing 
thoughts which had again assailed her with 
renewed force after her visit to. Bloomford. 
For several months she had scarcely read at 
all. Her dainty little library, consisting of 
beautiful bound editions of the poets, 
novelists and historians, such a library as her 
father considered best adapted to the needs 
of a young lady, and which he had selected 
with the utmost care, now stood ranged in a 
couple of handsome book-cases on one side of 
her parlour ; but the glass doors had re- 
mained unopened since her return to Eng- 
land. Her Bible, which had but lately been 
her constant companion, now lay upon the 
.table, unopened from day to day. Those 



298 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

agonisiDg doubts and obstinate questionings 
which so seldom assail a girl's mind, thanks 
to the atmosphere of enervating pietism in 
which females usually grow to maturity, if, 
indeed, they can ever be said to reach that 
stage, those torturing thoughts which every 
intellectual youth has sooner or later ta 
combat with, now held Helen at their mercy. 
Now, more than ever, did she bitterly mourn 
her father's death, which had deprived 
her of the one person to whom she could lay 
bare her mind in perfect confidence. As she 
had no longer her father's living voice to 
advise her, she took refuge in reflection upon 
his life, striving to wrest from her memory of 
his acts and words, an explanation of the 
creed by which he had lived. As yet she 
could arrive at few satisfactory results. Her 
practical knowledge of life was too limited to 
afford her the necessary means of observa- 
tion and comparison, and little by little, under 
the guidance of bitter suffering, she was led 
into that path which could alone afford an 
exit from the gloomy regions into which she 
had strayed. 

One morning Maud had been engaged for 
an hour, reading in the library, and was just 
rising to leave the room, when she was in 
turn visited unexpectedly by Helen, wha 
walked softly into the room. 

** You here, Maud ! " exclaimed Helen. '* I 
thought this was your usual drawing hour ?'^ 



EMANCIPATION. 299 

" So it is," replied Maud ; ** but I seem 
to have no taste for it this morning. And 
you — I thought this was your usual music 
hour ? " 

" So it is," returned the other, smiling ; 
" but Mr. Walsh is unable to give me my 
lesson this morning. You won't let me drive 
you from the room ? " 

" You came very opportunely to warn me 
that the morning is drawing on. I have an 
appointment with the housekeeper at eleven 
— more's the pity. I had quite forgotten the 
time over an interesting book." 

As she spoke she closed the book that lay 
open before her, and left it there upon the 
table. 

Whether she had drawn Helen's attention 
to it purposely or not may remain a ques- 
tion ; but as soon as she had left the room 
the latter at once took up the work to 
examine it. 

It was the English translation of Strauss' 
*• Leben Jesu," the popular edition. With a 
throb of the pulses, as if in anticipation of 
what the book contained — though as yet she 
had no knowledge of it — she assumed the 
seat Maud had just left, and began to read. 

She did not appear at luncheon ; but this 
was such an ordinary occurrence that it at- 
tracted no attention ; but when the dinner 
hour had arrived, and she was still absent, 
Maud sought her, first in her own sitting- 



300 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

room, and then, failing of success, in the 
library. 

Helen had lit the reading-lamp, and was 
still bending over the pages of Strauss. 

She started as Maud entered the room, and 
rose from her seat. 

** Are you resolved to become an absolute 
chameleon, my dear child?" cried Miss 
Gresham. "But," she added immediately, 
" I see that air has not been your only sus- 
tenaDce all day. Do you like my book ?" 

"Is it yours?" asked Helen, who had 
closed the book at the other's entrance, and 
now stood with her eyes cast down, for a 
moment uncertain how to act. 

" Yes ; papa gave it to me when it was 
first published, three years ago, and when, as 
you can imagine, I had but little taste for it. 
Do you like it ?" 

Helen paused for a moment, without re- 
plying. 

" I cannot say yet," she returned, in alow 
voice. " I — I cannot say till I have finished 
it." 

" Shall you have the resolution ?" 

" I think so," replied Helen, looking up 
into her friend's face with a seriousness of 
expression, now unmixed with doubt or 
shame. 

" I read it a year ago," said the other. 
" Perhaps you would like to take it away with, 
jou 



P» 



EMANCIPATION. 301 

" If you would kindly lend it to me, I 
should." 

" Take it, by all means. But, in the mean- 
time, are you aware that the dinner bell has, 
rung ?" 

'' I did not hear it." 

" So I supposed. Come, I can only allow 
you three minutes." 

" I should be glad if I might be excused 
to-night, Maud," said Helen. " I really have 
no appetite. Would you ask Mr. Grresham to 
excuse me ?" 

" Certainly, if you wish it. But I am not 
going to allow you to macerate yourself. I 
shall send you something up." 

" Thanks, Maud ; you are very kind." 

So Helen ran quickly upstairs, carrying 
Strauss with her, and sat down to her read- 
ing-desk with a true, though solemn, glad- 
ness of heart to which she had long been a 
stranger, which, perhaps, in its present form, 
she had never before experienced. 

And long after the rest of the house was in 
darkness and quietness, when the noise had 
died away in the street below, and the strik- 
ing of the bells in the neighbouring steeples 
was almost the only sound to be heard, 
Helen still sat at her reading-desk, bending 
over the pages of him whose eyes saw with 
surpassing clearness through the mists of 
time and prejudice, whose spirit comes forth, 
like a ray of sunshine in winter, to greet 



302 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN, 

those toiling painfully upwards to the temple 
of Truth. 

Mr. Grresham's library was rich in German 
authors, a language of which Helen had as 
yet no knowledge. Overmastered by the 
eagerness of curiosity, which the reading of 
Strauss had awakened in her, she now pro- 
cured a German grammar, and began, with 
painful earnestness, the study of the lan- 
guage. 

Through many a long summer day she 
toiled at the grammar and dictionary, mani- 
festing a strength of endurance which the 
frailty of her frame scarcely seemed capable 
of supporting. 

But, after all, her progress was too slow to 
keep pace with her eagerness. 

One morning, about the middle of July, 
just when Mr. Gresham was beginning to 
make arrangements for a tour on the Con- 
tinent, she came downstairs prepared with a 
report which she had long meditated. 

Mr. Gresham was seated in an arm-chair 
as she entered. Maud had not yet made her 
appearance. 

After the usual greeting, Helen took a chair 
by her guardian's side, and requested his at- 
tention for a moment. 

** I have for some time wished' to ask a 
favour of you," she began. *• Will you let 
me go to Germany?" 

'* Why that is just what we are all think- 



EMANCIPATION. 303 

ing of doing, Helen," replied the artist. 
** We shall certainly include the Rhine in our 
tour." 

" You misunderstand me. I mean that I 
should like to go to Germany to study there 
for a year or two. I have a great anxiety to 
learn German thoroughly." 

"Why didn't you tell me? I could have 
found you a teacher." 

"A teacher would scarcely answer my 
purpose," pursued Helen. " He could not 
give me such a thorough knowledge as I re- 
quire." 

" But whatever has got into your head, 
Helen ? Are you going to run away from us 
and look out for a place as a governess ?" 

" You are too kind to me for that. I fear 
I can hardly explain to you why I feel this 
desire." 

At this moment Maud entered. 

" What do you think, Maudie," said Mr. 
Gresham. "Here is Pallas threatening to 
desert us, and favour with her omens some 
synod of tobacco- wreathed professors in the 
land of the Teutons." 

" I must beg you to speak somewhat less 
figuratively, papa, if I am to understand your 
meaning," replied the young lady, whose 
fresh complexion contrasted markedly with 
Helen's habitual paleness. 

" In language suited to your intellect, 
then, Miss Gresham, she asks me to let her go 



304 



WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 



to Germany for a short time, to study the 
language." 

" And then ?" asked Maud. 

" Yes. And then, Helen ?" repeated Mr. 
Gresham. 

" I cannot look so far forward," replied 
Helen. ''At my age, every day brings changes 
which one would have thought years could not 
effect." 

She adhered jBrmly to her purpose, and her 
guardian, as usual, gave way to her wish. 

It remained to decide upon the town she 
should go to reside in, and here her choice was 
influenced by her eager interest in Strauss. 

She had discovered that at Tubingen 
Strauss had taught, and to Tubingen ac- 
cordiugly she decided to go, doubting not 
that her master's iufluence would there be 
most pronounced. 

This determination of Helen's involved a 
few necessary changes in her guardian's 
plans ; but ultimately all set out together, 
and together enjoyed a Continental tour of 
nearly two months' duration. In the course 
of this Mr. Gresham procured some good in- 
troductions to the professorial circle in 
Tubingen from one or two artist-friends, 
with the result that when he and Maud re- 
turned home, they left Helen behind them in 
the old university-town, comfortably estab- 
lished in the house of the widow of a recently- 
deceased professor. 



EMANCIPATION. 305 

Helen took leave of them in excellent 
spirits, looking forward to a long period of 
study with the utmost enthusiasm ; and as 
for Mr. Grresham, he was in reality by no 
means sorry to be freed for a while from 
the task of caring for a young lady whose 
disposition appeared so little congenial to 
his own. 



VOL. I. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



MIND-GBOWTH. 



" October, 5th, 1868. — My guardian and 
Maud left Tubingen last evening, finally aban- 
doning me, as the former characteristically 
expressed it, to my own devices. What 
these devices may be, I think neither of them 
has a very clear idea ; possibly they look 
upon me as a hare-brained girl, possessing a 
desperate will of my own, and determined to 
gratify every whim, great or small. Doubt- 
less it is partly my own fault if I am mis- 
understood by them, for I have never in 
reality opened my heart to them and exposed 
all the irresistible yearnings which have 
driven me to this step. These yearnings, it 
must be confessed, are as yet a trifle vague ; 
yet there is one definite cry which my heart 
gives forth day after day, and that is — 
knowledge, knowledge, knowledge! It is 
for knowledge that I have come here, and 
knowledge I will pursue with all the energy 
my nature is capable of. 

" Whither that knowledge may lead me, I 
cannot as yet tell. Never mind ; at least it 
will lead somewhere^ give me, sooner or later. 



MIND-GROWTH. 307 

some definite convictions, such as my soul 
hungers for. 

" This is the first time I have ever begun to 
keep a diary, and I wonder the thought 
never occurred to me before. The following 
pages are not to be filled with pretty senti- 
ments, hysterical wailings, or scraps of verse 
— I will not say poetry — I write for my own 
benefit, that I may more clearly gauge my 
own progress, and not for the amusement of 
others. 

*' I am such a poor hand at conversation 
that it is really only fair I should be permitted 
to soliloquise a little. Who is there in the 
world with whom I can talk confidentially ? 
Not a soul. I once thought that Maud would 
make a true friend, but I have long felt her 
companionship terribly unsatisfying. I won- 
der whether I shall make a friend here in 
. Germany ? I fear not ; I am too timid and 
retiring, and adapt myself with such difficulty 
to the usages of society. Here in the silence 
of my own room I am comfortable ; I wish 
there were no necessity for me to ever 
leave it. But I must really force myself to 
become acquainted with people, if only for 
the sake of learning to speak German. 

" Frau Stockmaier, with whom I am living, 
seems really a very agreeable woman, and, I 
should imagine, cultivated to a very fair de- 
gree. She cannot speak English, but is well 
acquainted with French, and in the latter 



308 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

language we have hitherto for the most part 
conversed. But, of course, as she reminds 
me, that will not do. I must reconcile my- 
self to the first serious plunge into the 
troubled waters of German conversation, and 
the sooner the better. 

** One thing, however, I do not like in Fran 
Stockmaier. She really treats me too much 
as if I were still a child. She asked me my 
age this morning, and on my telling her that 
I was seventeen last April, she smiled and 
expressed a wonder that my guardian should 
have ventured to leave me here alone. I 
confess I felt a little piqued, for, if I may 
trust my glass, my personal appearance is not 
very childish, and as regards my mind — . 
But here I should perhaps whisper to myself 
a caution against spiritual pride. 

" As yet I am far from clear as to the order 
of studies I shall pursue ; but perhaps that is 
of no immediate consequence. My first task 
is to become thoroughly acquainted with 
German, and how long that will take me I 
dare not think. 

" Frau Stockmaier is to be herself my in- 
structress for the present. I think she will 
not exercise too strict a despotism in intel- 
lectual matters, for that would be intoler- 
able. I cannot as yet make out whether she 
is orthodox and conventional in her beliefs ; 
at any rate, she does not appear to be intole- 
rant, and for that I must be thankful." 



MIND-GEOWTH. 309 

" Oct. 10th. — A delightful walk this morn- 
ing with Frau Stockmaier, through lovely 
autumn scenery. How T wish I had taken 
up my abode here earlier in the summer, and 
how I shall long, all through the coming 
winter, for the return of sunny weather. 

" After walking through the town, crossing 
the Neckar, and taking a turn through the 
beautiful Platanen- AUee, we passed over the 
bridge and went in the direction of the 
Oesterberg, passing the house of the poet 
TJhland. At present I am purposely ab- 
staining from all reading of poetry, but some 
day I hope to know Uhland ; Frau Stock- 
maier speaks of him with much enthusiasm. 
We climbed the Oesterberg, passing between 
vineyards and orchards, and, on reaching the 
summit, were richly rewarded for our efforts. 
On the point known as the Wielandshohe, 
we stood for fully an hour, enjoying the 
glorious view. Below us lay the whole 
valley of the Neckar, the river flowing along 
it like a green cord, and also the valley of the 
little river Ammer, on the banks of which are 
the Botanical Gardens, and, near them, our 
house. In the distance stretched the Swa- 
bian Alps, one could see the Castle of Hohen- 
zoUern, making a fine object against a back- 
ground of clear sky. We returned home tired 
but delighted with our walk. 

'* Already I am becoming very fond of 
Tubingen. I wish Mr. Grresham had remained 



310 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

long enough to paint views of the beautiful 
old place from several points which I could 
point out. I think I shall be tempted to 
exercise my own slight skill before the rich 
autumn hues have quite died away from the 
trees and the hillsides. I should like to 
sketch the whole town as it creeps in ter- 
races up the mountain to the grey old 
towered and moated stronghold of Hohen- 
tiibingen. 

** The mountain- scenery around, without 
being absolutely imposing, is excessively 
beautiful. Especially the form of the Oester- 
berg, seen from a distance, is wonderfully- 
graceful. 

** And then there is such a delightful air 
of peace and quietness throughout the whole 
country, as if these pleasant hills shut out all 
the troublous noises of the busy world. I 
like to pass the University in my walks, to 
dream over its four hundred years of exist- 
ence ; to go back in fancy to the days when 
Eeuchlin and Melanchthon taught within its 
walls. In the University the air of peace, of 
which I have spoken, is especially noticeable^ 
for here, side by side, are a Protestant or a 
Roman Catholic institution, the Stift and the 
Convict^ each nursing its own disciples un- 
disturbed by the neighbourhood of a creed 
essentially different. 

" It strikes me that this state of affairs 
must very greatly conduce to liberality of 



MIND-GBOWTH. 311 

thought among the students, at all events 
among the Protestant students. And yet I 
cannot forget how Strauss was rewarded 
for his labours ; but I suppose it would be 
too much to demand toleration for such a 
spirit as his. 

'* Frau Stockmaier is very agreeable com- 
pany on a walk, and yet I cannot shake off 
my habit of very much preferring to be alone. 
Daring the last few days I have been 
especially thoughtful, finding a constant de- 
light in wandering about alone, especially — 
and this would, to some, seem childish — in 
watching the golden leaves fall one by one to 
the ground. A favourite resort, when I am 
alone, is the fine ' Platanen-Allee ' on the 
other side of the river. The trees run in two 
noble rows over against the houses of the 
town, forming, as it were, a natural temple. 
When I walk alone here an inexpressible 
longing comes over me to take up some of 
our dear old English poets and revel in them 
once more ; but I do not permit myself to 
yield. For the present I must give myself 
wholly to stern facts ; imagination must be 
laid aside till my mind is more at ease. But 
if I only could once throw aside this eternal 
trouble of my thoughts which does not let 
me rest, how delightful would it be to yield 
to the impressions of this lovely nature and 
dream away my life. But that is a dangerous 
thought." 



312 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" Nov. Both. — As winter draws on, and 
there is less and less temptation to wander 
about the hills, I am able to devote myself to 
severer study. Already I have made very 
noticeable progress in my German, and can 
now understand and make myself under- 
stood on every-day matters with very toler- 
able facility. I have determined that at the 
beginning of the new year I will commence 
a theological course, and, perhaps, at the 
same time, peep a little into philosophy. I 
begin to associate rather more freely with 
the friends and acquaintances of Frau Stock- 
maier, and have already been introduced to 
several gentlemen who would be willing to 
act as my tutors. Frau Stockmaier recom- 
mends me to choose a certain Dr. Bidenbenz, 
who is a Stiftsrepetenf, that is to say, one who 
has completed his University curriculum, and 
is now engaged in directing the studies of 
undergraduates. Dr. B. is a youngish man, 
of rather pleasing appearance, and said to 
be remarkably clever. Though essentially a 
theologian, he would also be able to direct 
my philosophical reading, since, I am in- 
formed, all the students of the Sttft are 
compelled to study philosophy for two years 
before commencing their theology. Of 
course I am, as yet, very ignorant in these 
matters, but it appears to me, from what I 
have heard and read of German philosophy, 
that those two years must be a somewhat 



MlND-GEOWTn, 313 

dangerous side-path into the high-road of 
orthodox religion. 

*'I am prepared to find my tutor rather un- 
congenial at first, for I hear he is a stout op- 
ponent of dear old Strauss. Yet, on that 
very account he will be very useful to me. I 
want to see orthodox Christianity vigorously 
defended, not on the ground of mere senti- 
ment, with which I am but too familiar, but 
with sterling arguments which will bear 
criticism of the light of superior knowledge. 
I trust I am by no means bigoted, though 
prejudiced I certainly am. Something warns 
me that the end of my intercourse with Dr. 
Eidenbenz will be mutual dissatisfaction ; 
but probably he will have more ground for 
dissatisfaction than myself. At all events, 
he will serve to conform me in the beliefs I 
have embraced. And then, if his theology 
is barren to me, possibly his philosophy may 
stand me in better stead. 

*' In addition to my Grerman, I have com- 
menced to study Greek for a few hours each 
day ; also to read a little Latin occasionally. 
I wish my poor father had lived long enough 
to give me the solid grounding in Greek that 
he did in Latin. I found the grammar 
horribly difficult, but it must be acquired. 
First of all I wish to be able to read the New / 
Testament in the original ; then, when I have 
got through my period of doubt and see my 
life float once more into calm waters, I know 



314 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

well what glorious regions a knowledge of 
Greek will open to me. If a mere transla^ 
tion could inspire such a sonnet as that of 
Keats, what must Homer in the original 
be!" 

"Feb. 1st, 1869.— For a month I , have 
been working with Dr. Eidenbenz, and with 
what result ? I think I may already safely 
say that my prophecy has fulfilled itself. In 
a word, the doctor is an unmitigated sophist. 
At first he followed my request, and adhered 
strictly to a critical examination of the 
origins of Christianity, and in his treatment 
of the subject there was little to find fault 
with. His knowledge seemed deep and ex- 
tensive, and some of the information he gave 
me proved extremely interesting. But by 
the end of the second week I noticed a de- 
cided change for the worse ; he began to be 
polemical, and polemical to an alarming de- 
gree. Oh, how learned he has already made 
me in modern sects and schisms. And to 
maintain his position he has recourse to 
sophisms which a healthy-minded child could 
at once see through, though I grant he seems 
to be sincerely their dupe. It is evident that 
he will never turn my mind back from the 
course into which Strauss irresistibly pro- 
pelled it. I have, however, no intention of 
ceasing these lessons as yet. It is only fair 
to hear him to the end." 



MIND-GEOWTH. 315 

*^ March 1st. — To-day ends my second 
month with Dr. Bidenbenz, and, to tell the 
truth, I am heartily tired of him. As I fore- 
saw, I am merely streno^thened in my 
rationalism ; no argument I have heard ad- 
vanced has sufficed to shake it. For several 
hours after he had left me yesterday, I sat 
reflecting earnestly upon these matters, en- 
deavouring to ask myself, with all the 
solemnity of which I am capable, whether I 
am a really conscientious disbeliever, or one 
merely from caprice, affectation, or any other 
unworthy impulse. I convinced myself that 
no such impulse has power over me ; I dis- 
believe because my reason bids me do so. It 
may be my mind follows a hereditary tendency 
on this, for, looking back in memory to those 
last years of my father's life, I now feel con- 
vinced that he, too, had yielded to the force 
of doubt ; a suggestion which explains much 
in his conduct to me which I was never able 
to understand. 

" In truth, I have fed to repletion on com- 
parative estimates of Petrine and Pauline 
Christianity, and the like, and I have resolved 
to cease these theological studies, for my ob- 
ject is gained. But the philosophical readings 
I shall still persist in, for I find them vastly 
more interesting. True, the question now 
and then arose in my mind : * Of what avail 
will all these metaphysical systems be in 
helping me to lead a happier and a better 



316 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

life, or in enabling me to make the lives of 
others happier and better ? ' But I suppose 
such doubts are really too profane. Dr. 
Eidenbenz is an enthusiastic metaphysician, 
and it puzzles me sadly to explain the co- 
existence of this enthusiasm with that mania 
for religious dogmas. The other morning I 
actually ventured to ask him to justify him- 
self, and he replied with the curious state- 
ment that this philosophy was a mere matter 
of abstract speculation, a highly-amusing 
mental employment which could not in the 
least interfere with his more serious views of 
life. I could have made a rather startling 
reply, but wisely held my peace. 

'* A letter from Maud to-day. It seems to 
me sadly empty and unsatisfying. Why does 
she never send me her serious thoughts ? 
Perhaps she would ask me the same ques- 
tion." 

"April 18th. — The last few days have 
witnessed a most curious, and rather alarm- 
ing event here, which Frau Stockmaier tells 
me is by no means uncommon in the spring- 
time. The whole valley of the Neckar is 
flooded. ^AU the beautiful walks which I 
had again began to visit with delightful an- 
ticipations of spring sunshine, are deep 
under water, which rises even to the boughs 
of the linden and plane trees. This morning 
I ascended the Schlossberg, from whence the 



MIND-GROWTH. 317 

view was very extraordiYiary. All the lovely 
stretch of green meadows on the south side 
of the Neckar up to the foot of the hills, was 
converted into a vast rolling sea. I thought 
irresistibly of Dr. Bidenbenz and of the 
Deluge. 

" The doctor has remained here during the 
Easter vacation, and we have been busy for 
some weeks investio^atinor the fearful and 
wonderful theories of Messrs. Fichte, Schell- 
ing, and Hegel, and I protest I am sick to 
death of them all. It is a habit of mine to 
listen very patiently for a long time to my 
tutor's expositions, and then suddenly to 
astound him by some startling question. I 
know he reofards me as a veritable dauo^hter 
of the Philistines ; but I follow the bent of 
my nature, and better to do that than to 
play the hypocrite. For the life of me, I 
cannot help interrupting him now and then, 
and exclaiming: 'What is the use of it?' 
In reply to which he merely smiles con- 
temptuously, pitying my lack of appreciation. 
But I am not so sure that a contemptuous 
smile is a satisfactory answer to my question. 
If he asserts that such philosophising is of 
use, inasmuch as it sharpens the human in- 
tellect, keeps active speculation alive, and 
strengthens habits of independent thought, 
then I will grant that he is right. But 
surely the same results might be obtained by 
exercise upon very much more satisfagtory 



318 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

topics. What is it to me whether I am or I 
am noty whether the internal world really 
exists^ or is a mere creation of my fancy ? 
Such speculations do not and cannot influence 
my practical life, which is the most serious 
consideration to me. I may be a young, un- 
learned, inexperienced girl, but still there is 
that within me that says that such questions 
as these are unanswerable, that to endeavour 
to ascertain the ultimate foundation of our 
knowledge of existing things, is, as men now 
are, an impossible task. And, such being 
the case, I confess I am rapidly losing all in- 
terest in metaphysics. Possibly if I were 
reading with a man who really held one of 
these theories, and could press it on me with 
all the energy of true conviction, I might see 
it in a different light ; but Dr. Bidenbenz 
•does not pretend to hold one of them. 

*' I was rather surprised last night to find 
Trau Stockmaier reading a Grerman transla- 
tion of Darwin's * Origin of Species.' I 
have never read the book, though I heard 
father speak of it occasionally. I am sure 
it must be immensely interesting. A hunger 
for it seemed to seize me as I looked over 
the pages. I almost think natural science 
would be a study admirably adapted to my 
taste." 

" May 2. — I have read the * Origin of 
Species ' in German, and it has created an 



MIND-GEOWTH. 819 

enthusiasm in me such as perhaps no other 
book, except the * Leben Jesu,' ever did. How 
delightful it is to receive fresh, strong sup- 
port when one is at war with one's OAvn mind. 
Here is a theory which recompenses me a 
thousand fold for my loss of the old Biblical 
superstitions. What immense labour, what 
a wonderful intellect does it represent ! Yes, 
yes, this is real, solid food, no insubstantial 
cloud-shape or chimera. Here is a theory 
built up on solid facts, facts one can grasp, 
handle, examine with the eye or the 
microscope. Oh, how dear hard, plain facts 
have become to me since I have been wander- 
ing in the dreamlands of philosophy. I 
wonder whether Dr. Bidenbenz has read 
Darwin. I must ask him. 

** Beautiful spring weather is once more 
breathing upon the face of the land, making 
field and land lovely past description. I 
begin to look forward eagerly to long summer 
walks in the woods, lonely walks, when I can 
indulge to the uttermost in that self-com- 
muning which I delight in. With the im- 
pulse of a great delight, born, perhaps, of 
the season, I have cast aside, for a while — 
perhaps for ever — both theology and 
philosophy, and returned to poetry and 
romance. Long, long have I panted for 
them, *as the hart panteth for the water 
brooks. ' I have begun to read Goethe and 
Schiller both at once. Uhland, too, I have 



320 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

at length peeped into, and with much delight. 
Frau Stockmaier loves Uhland, and often 
warms eloquent to me with regard to him. 
What I know of his life and personal 
character pleases me much. A great poet is 
a fine subject for thought, but surely a great 
poet who also takes a noble part in the 
practical life of the world is fit for the ad- 
miration of the gods. Henceforth I shall 
always pass his house with a fresh interest. 
This morning I made a pilgrimage to his 
grave in the cemetery. 

" I made a new acquaintance last night, a 
certain Dr. Gmelin, Frau Stockmaier's 
brother-in-law, who has been living as 
privatgelehrter in Stuttgart, but is now come 
to settle in Tubingen. It is probable he will 
have rooms in our house, and I sincerely 
hope so, for even at the first aspect I con- 
ceived a strong liking for him. He may be 
some forty years old, and has a wonderfully 
intellectual countenance, marked, moreover, 
with a rare benevolence. Frau Stockmaier 
smiles when she speaks of him ; he seems a 
favourite of hers. She tells me he has never 
filled any professorship, though several have, 
from time to time, been offered him. He 
has very independent ideas on many subjects, 
and would never consent to hamper his free 
development by submission to official re- 
sponsibilities and restraints. I admire him 
for his consistency." 



MIND-GBOWTH. 321 

"May 10. — I have definitely ceased my 
connection with Dr. Bidenbenz, and rejoice 
that I had the resolution to do so. Really, 
to relinquish Dr. Gmelin's conversation for 
Dr. Bidenbenz's prelections was rather too 
much. I admire Dr. Grnelin more every day, 
and am flattered at the interest he appears 
to take in me. Frau Stockmaier tells me he 
has always been esteemed a misogamist, but 
that he ever really was such I cannot believe. 
He's all courtesy ; certainly I never associated 
with a truer gentleman. And then his con- 
versation is so fresh, so genial. Since he has 
come to reside in our house, he and I fre- 
quently take long walks together, and never 
run short of matter for discussion. Dr. 
Gmelin is a philosopher, without doubt, but, 
it appears to me, not committed to any defi- 
nite system. In our conversation this morn- 
ing he made frequent mention of Comte, 
whoso name I have frequently seen, but of 
whom I know nothing. I must seek for in- 
formation regarding him, for he evidently 
exercises much influence over Dr. Gmelin's 
mind. 

" Dr. G. has lent me Hiickel's * Natiirliche 
Schopfungsgeschichte,' a work inspired by 
Darwin. I shall read it greedily." 

" Juno 20th. — I have had a delightful walk 
with Dr. Gmelin over the hills, through 
woods and orchards, to Bebenhausen, where 

VOL. I. Y 



322 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

the cloister is. The building is one of the 
finest remnants of Gothic architecture in 
Germany. It lies buried in a deep valley, 
appearing suddenly at one's feet as you issue 
from the thick beech-wood. The foliage was 
glorious, lighted up by the warm June sun. 
Exquisitely peaceful did the old cloister look, 
wonderfully attractive for an imaginative 
mind wearied with the combats of life. Dr. 
Gmelin told me that he had often wished his 
conscience would allow him to turn Eoman 
Catholic and enter some such retreat as this ; 
and indeed I am not surprised at his ex- 
periencing the desire, for his character has 
much of gentle and poetical mysticism in it. 
Yet at other times I see him give signs of 
such an earnestly practical temperament, 
that I can hardly reconcile the two sides of 
his nature. Doubtless it is this wavering and 
undecided bending of his mind which has 
prevented him from ever doing any important 
literary work. I, too, fear very much the 
same conflict within me at times ; perhaps it 
is the same with all people in a greater or 
lesser degree. But for the cloister I can now 
feel little but horror, I can only see the 
dreadful side of this seclusion from the 
world's life. Even the life I lead here in 
Tubingen, though far from monastic, often 
somewhat irks me. I often think I should 
find a truer field for my exertions in the tur- 
moil of some great city, such as London. 



MIND-GEOWTH. 323 

But how I should employ myself I cannot yet 
clearly see. Possibly I may some day. 

** We talked of a multitude of things on 
our way — of fate, of predestination, of the 
basis of morals, of the future of society, of 
woman's place in the history of the world, in 
short of almost every important question 
which either of us has ever thought of. Dr. 
Gmelin holds many strange theories, some of 
them wonderfully at variance with his 
practice. As we stood looking at the 
cloister, the conversation turned on the 
subject of asceticism, and he thereupon un- 
folded to me a dreadful theory of life. The 
substance of it was this : That the origin of 
all evil is to be found in the desire for life, 
and that he is the perfect man who succeeds 
in altogether uprooting this desire from his 
mind, losing the sense of his own identity, 
fixing his thoughts eternally in an abso- 
lutely passionless calm. The desire for life 
being the root of all evil, it follows that the 
world, by virtue of its very existence, is 
hopelessly corrupt, that there is no hope for 
it in the future, nothing but condemnation 
for its past. Hence, if every man were truly 
wise, he would mortify all his passions, settle 
down to a condition of absolute inactivity, 
and so overcome evil by the complete extinc- 
tion of life. On my expressing myself pained 
and shocked at such a philosophy. Dr. Gmelin 
laughed and told me that it was his favourite 



824 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

theory. Subsequently I learned from him 
that it was the teaching of the philosopher 
Schopenhauer, whom hitherto I have only 
known by name. Dr. Gmelin confesses that, 
with him, it is nothing more than a theory, 
that it does not in the least influence his 
practical life, as indeed I know from ex- 
perience. Yet it is strange to be pessimistic 
in theory and optimistic in practice ; such a 
contradiction would be impossible in my own 
nature. I suppose the truth of it is that his 
holding such a theory is a mere matter of 
sentiment ; his mind, I know, has a natural 
bent towards asceticism and mysticism. 

*' Dr. Gmelin has just knocked at my door 
and brought me two rather large volumes. 
He handed me them with a smile, and, on 
examining the titles, I found they were a 
work of Schopenhauer, called * Parerga und 
l^aralipomena.' In them, he tells me, I shall 
find the kernel of the philosopher's theories. 
I shall read them at once." 

'* August 3rd. — I have read through the 
two volumes of Schopenhauer twice, very care- 
fully. I confess I have been agreeably dis- 
appointed. From what Dr. Gmelin had told 
me, I expected to find a misanthrope, but I 
have found the very opposite. The reading 
of these volumes has given me the utmost 
pleasure, and I am sure they will exercise a 
lasting influence upon my mind. Am I then 



MIND-GROWTH. 325 

a convert to the doctrine of pessimism ? Not 
by any means, for, after all it appears to me 
that his pessimism is the least valuable part 
of Schopenhauer's teaching. The really ex- 
cellent part of him is his wonderfully strong 
sympathy with the sufferings of mankind. 
Again and again he tells us that we should 
lose the consciousness of self in care for 
others, in fact identify ourselves with all our 
fellows, see only one great self in the whole 
world. For this doctrine alone I thank him 
heartily ; it chimes exactly with the principle 
which has long been yearning for expression 
in my own mind." 

''August 10th. — Having acquired some 
knowledge of Schopenhauer, Dr. Graelin is 
now very anxious that I should read Comte ; 
he asserts that I should like Iiim immensely. 
When he first proposed it, I declared that I 
was weary of philosophy, and had begun to 
wander at my will over the fields of poetry. 
But he presses me so earnestly that I shall 
be obliged to yield. Indeed, from what he 
tells me of Comte, I feel rather attracted. It 
seems it is Comte' s principle that the true 
destination of philosophy must be social, 
practical, and herein I heartily agree with him. 
He, too, insists strongly upon the develop- 
ment of sympathetic instincts for the human 
race at large. The latter principle I have 
thoroughly imbibed from Schopenhauer. 



326 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

What if Cointe can afford me some idea of 
the manner in which the principle may be 
practically worked out ? That would bie just 
what I need." 

" Dec. 1st. — For nearly four months I 
have been hard at work upon Corate's 
* Philosophic Positive.' Yes, Dr. Gmelin 
was indeed right when he said this would 
suit me. I could not have conceived a system 
so admirably adapted to secure my sympathy. 
First and foremost, Comte discards meta- 
physics, thereby earning my heartiest appro- 
bation. He shows that metaphysical systems 
are a thing of the past, something which had 
its inevitable place in the history of mankind, 
but which has served its purpose and may be 
cast aside for something better. How de- 
lighted I am with his masterly following of 
the history of mankind through every stage 
of its development. There is something en- 
trancing to me in these firmly-fixed laws, 
these positive investigations. Comte is for 
me the supplement to Darwin ; the theories 
of both point to the same result, and must be 
true ! What encouragement he gives to 
ardent work ! How grand to feel that one 
is actually helping on the progress of 
humanity, as every one is doing who seeks 
earnestly to learn and to propagate the truth. 
Comte hopes for a speedy rectification of all 
the errors of our social system, not a rectifi- 



MIND-GROWTH. 327 

cation of arbitrary means, but one whioli 
follows naturally and necessarily upon the 
whole course of previous history. He holds 
that the first step towards this improvement 
is the re-discussing and re-modelling of all 
social theories in a purely scientific spirit, and 
their disposition in a systematic whole with 
all the rest of human knowledge. This is a 
noble theory. I feel convinced that Dr. 
Gmelin in reality holds these views ; I must 
bring him to confession." 

** Dec. 10th. — It has been decided between 
Dr. Gmelin and myself that our conversation 
shall henceforth always run in practical grooves. 
Our metaphysical and religious discussions 
we will henceforth throw aside as done with. 
Every day I feel the longing for active life 
growing stronger within me. * What can a 
woman do in the world?' I asked my friend this 
morning. His reply was wise and encourag- 
ing. I have already told him that I am 
possessed of considerable means, and it is his 
belief that, under these circumstances, if only 
I have the courage to despise vulgar con- 
ventionality and to pursue what I consider 
the path of duty, I can do considerable good. 
In early life, he travelled a good deal in 
Europe, and made it one of his special objects 
to observe the condition of the poor. Even 
now it is one of his favourite occupations to 
plan schemes for the relief of the poverty 



328 woEKEBS m thk dawn. 

which burdens the world. In the course of 
a long conversation he made me acquainted 
with some of the theories of social improve- 
ment which are beginning to be advocated in 
Germany. Most of these involve an entire 
re-organisation of society, and that, though 
it will come in time, I fear neither Dr. 
Gmelin nor I shall live to see. Putting aside 
these extensive plans, we agreed that what 
was especially needed just now was the 
earnest exertion of private individuals. Let 
only private individuals do their utmost to 
relieve misery, let them keep the subject 
constantly in discussion, let them never lose 
sight of the need for improvement, and radical 
improvement will come as soon as is con- 
sistent with the progress of destiny. I am 
ashamed to think 'how little I know practi- 
cally of the misery of great cities. Often I 
think that I shall cut short my proposed two 
years' stay in Germany, and return forthwith 
to London, to learn how I may perhaps bo 
useful. Yet I am very loth to lose Dr. 
Gmelin's society. He has already done me 
vast good, and is capable of benefiting me 
still more." 

'' January 3rd, 1870. — A new year has 
began for me. Never before had this com- 
mencement of a new division of time such 
significance for me as now. Oh, how eagerly 
I long to get away into the midst of active 



MIND-GROWTH. 329 

life, there to play my part in the service of 
that -true religion, the Religion of Humanity. 
What wonderful changes has my mind under- 
gone since I have been in Grermany, and how 
I shall always love to look upon Tubingen, 
upon this dear Schwaben where I have seen 
so much and been so happy. 

'^ Yes, how much have I to thank Germany 
for. I came here with a mind rudely enough 
ploughed by the ploughshare of anguish, a 
mind lying in readiness for the sower, and 
here did the furrows receive these seeds 
which were to spring up into a harvest of 
peace and joy. How distant now seem those 
days which I languished out in bondage to 
the power of darkness, bondage of the spirit, 
far sterner and more deadly than any verit- 
able bondage of the flesh could be ! How 
well 1 remember the day when I took up 
Strauss' * Leben Jesu' as Maud left it on 
the library table at home. The book was 
to me like the first ray of heavenly light 
piercing the darkness of a night of anguish, 
and striving, and woe unutterable. And yet 
how strange it now seems to me that I should 
ever have gone through such suffering, and 
BO young, too. But it was terribly real at 
the time, and, but for happy circumstances, 
might have terminated very differently. I 
might even now have been telling my beads 
in a convent, hard-bound in the conception 
that thus I was fulfilling my own destiny 



330 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

and propitiating the favour of an avenging* 
deity. 

"No one can ever know how near I was 
becoming a Catholic during those days of 
bitter, bitter sorrow after my poor father s 
death. Even when I appeared to those who 
reasoned with me, most stubborn on ray own 
faith, even then I was often on the point of 
raising my eyes to Heaven with a wild cry of 
rapture at my release from the agony of 
doubt, and for ever after bending before the 
crucifix in a sunless contrition of soul. Thanks 
to the unknown hand which guides suffering 
humanity through the storms of intellectual 
growth, safely leading it at length into the 
predestined haven, thanks to that mighty 
hand, which at times I feel pressing upon my 
heart, and moulding it into the forms to 
which its energies adapt it, I survived the 
struggle, and live to look back with a smile 
of pity upon all that I endured. Of pity — 
by no means of contempt. At no stage in 
its struggles is a human mind contemptible; 
for as long as it does struggle, it asserts its 
native nobility, its inherent principle of life. 

" For some months I have read the Times 
regularly, day after day. I have been wrong 
to neglect newspapers so long. What an 
apocalypse of human mystery is here set 
before my eyes ! And yet how little con- 
scious of it seem those whom good fortune 
has raised above the fear of cold, hunger, and 



MIND-GROWTH. 331 

the diseases they engender. I read the reports, 
of a sitting in Parliament, and find that hours 
have been spent in the angry discussion of 
some absurd point of national etiquette, or 
on the clauses of a Bill the object of which 
seems to be merely to enrich a body of most 
undeserving men, and when I afterwards 
turn to the police reports, and read, as long 
as my nerves will permit me, the heart rend- 
ing stories which abound there, I am com- 
pelled to marvel that humanity is content to^ 
suffer so uncomplainingly." 

'* May 12th. — I have had many a long talk 
lately with Dr. Grmelin on the course I pro- 
pose to pursue when I return to England^ 
and he has given me many practical hints 
which I am sure will be useful. In religious 
matters he is wonderfully tolerant; almost 
too tolerant, I think ; and he never ceases to 
impress upon me what great and useful 
schemes of private charity are carried out by 
the religious sects. With some such sect he 
would have me enroll mysQlf, merely for the 
purpose of having a better field for my work. 
But I fail to see how this would be possible 
without a degree of hypocrisy to which I 
could never reconcile myself. Doubtless I 
shall see my way much more clearly when I 
am once more actually in London ; I shall be 
able to gauge the existent misery with my 
own eyes, and I am sure some good plan or 



332 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

other will not fail to suggest itself. Some- 
thing I am determined to do. To live the 
life of an ordinary wealthy lady, the life of 
" society," either altogether heedless of the 
sufferings of the poor, or occasionally satisfy- 
ing my conscience with a perfunctory contri- 
bution to one or two ill-conducted charities 
— that would be quite impossible for me. I 
wonder whether I am what is generally 
known as a ' strong-minded ' woman ? It 
is possible; for I certainly feel but little 
sympathy with those many pitiful weaknesses 
generally pronounced to be the amiabilities 
of my sex. Well, I can only hope that my 
strength of mind, if it exist, will stand me4n 
good stead, and enable me to make my life 
not altogether useless. 

'* Dr. Gmelin asked me the other day 
whether I did not intend to write at all on 
the subjects which interest me ; write, that is 
to say, in the periodicals and daily papers. 
On reflection, I think not. In the first place 
I am not by any means sure that I possess a 
spark of literary ability, and then it is my 
firm belief that such work is not woman's 
true sphere. If I were to write, it must be 
something of genuine scientific value, some- 
thing which would hasten the advent of vast 
social reforms; and to do that is certainly 
beyond my power. What ideas may sooner 
or later occur to me I shall employ myself in 
putting into practice; doubtless I shall have 



MTXD-GEOWTH. 333 

abundant opportunities. Nature appears to 
me to have ordained that woman's sphere 
should bo that of personal influence, and the 
influence of my own personality, such as it 
is, should be brought face to face with the 
horrors of helpless poverty. My ideas may 
be extravagant and unpractical, but I have 
faith in humanity. The results of my dotor- 
mination may not be great, but at all events 
they shall bo real." 

*' May 15th. — My time in Germany grows 
short. As regards those I shall leave behind 
mo here in dear old Tubingen, I shall depart 
with unfeigned regret ; as regards the pros- 
pects before me, I am all eagerness to bo 
gone. I have compelled Dr. Gmelin to 
promise that he will pay me a visit some day 
m Kngland, but f very much fear such a 
journey would require too much resolution 
for him. Years of motionless existence have 
80 bound him down to his books that I 
believe it would break his heart to have to 
leave thorn. 

" Of lateJ I have departed from my strict 
principle of reading none but German works, 
and in favour of one who I am surprised has 
not long since tempted me to forbidden fields. 
For a week I have been poring over Shelley, 
reading him to the exclusion of almost every, 
thing else — Shelley, whom when 1 was a 
child I read without understanding, yet with 



334 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

such delight, carried on from page to page by 
the magic of his verse, and occasionally the 
glimpse of a thought which dazzled my feeble 
eyes. Of all the poets — ^yes, of all I have ever 
read — Shelley is my chosen one. Poets such 
as Keats, who live for art alone, regardless of 
the stream of human life, which makes fresh 
the meadows and the woods where they sing 
their songs, these have their irresistible 
charm, but they cannot always satisfy the 
heart. It is that glorious band of which 
Shelley is the foremost spirit, who, not 
content with for ever hymning poems at the 
altar of beauty, echo in their noblest songs 
the accents of that unceasing woe which 
writhes in the heart of the universe — it is 
before these that I will fall down and worship 
with a devotion which shall only fade when 
the fire of life is quenched in my soul. They 
recognise that poetry is not alone the voice 
<^f j^y> but rather the noblest utterance of 
humanity clamouring for vengeance against its 
oppressors at the door of Fate. Nature has 
forbidden that I should join this noble choir, 
but I can at least assert my privilege to listen 
when others are deaf, and feel my heart 
stirred to action by the inspiring harmony. 

** Schopenhauer, Comte, and Shelley — these 
three have each in turn directed the growth 
of my moral life. Schopenhauer awakened 
within me the fire of sympathy, gave a name 
to the uneasy feeling which made my life 



MIND-GROWTH. 335 

restless, taught me to forget myself and to 
live in others. Comte then came to me with 
his lucid unfolding of the mystery of the 
world, showed me why the fire of sympathy 
burned so within my breast, taught me the 
use to which it should be directed. Last of 
all Shelley breathed with the breath of life 
on the dry bones of scientific theory, turned 
conviction into passion, lit the heavens of the 
future with such glorious rays that the eye 
dazzles in gazing upwards, strengthened the 
heart with enthusiasm as with a coat of mail. 
Can I ever count myself an atheist when I 
worship such gods as these?" 

** May 30th. — A few more days, and fare- 
well to Germany ! Farewell, also, to one 
phase of my life, that of sitting still and re- 
flecting. When I again step on the shores 
of England I shall be no longer a girl ; but, 
I trust, a woman whose sufferings and 
struggles have not been without profit to 
herself, and may, perchance, be the means of 
good to others." 



CHAPTER XV. 



THE EX-CLERGYMAN S BEQUEST. 

As the summer of 1870 began to draw near, 
the Greshams once more looked forward to 
..having Helen Norman back in London, and 
not a little conversation took place between 
father and daughter with regard to the pro- 
bable future relations betwen themselves and 
their ward. It was indeed a subject ad- 
mitting of some little speculation. Would 
Helen come back a confirmed religious 
devotee, prepared to spend her life in alms- 
giving and in the discharge of the duties of 
a hospital nurse ? Judging from her preva- 
lent mood two years ago this did not seem an 
unlikely contingency. On tbe other hand, 
her residence on the Continent might have 
banished these morbid notions from her 
mind, and, whilst adding to her intellect and 
accomplishments, have introduced a mixture 
of worldliness into her nature that would 
make her rather more like an ordinary- 
daughter of Eve than she had hitherto shown 
herself. Maud was inclined to adhere to the 
former supposition, considering it not un- 
likely that her friend would return a Roman 
Catholic. Mr. Gresham, however, sceptical. 



THE BX-OLBRGYMAN*S BEQUEST. 337 

as usual, in all that concerned human con- 
sistency, held to the opinion that she would 
return very much like any other girl of 
eighteen, possibly already engaged, or at all 
events anxious to be so, and no doubt eager 
to make the most, from a worldly point of 
view, of her position as a heiress. How far 
either of these acute observers was right, 
the reader has already had an opportunity 
of determining. 

They had very little means of judging of 
any alteration Helen's character might have 
undergone, except by their recollection of 
what she had previously been. For in her 
letters to Maud, written about once a month, 
she had confined herself entirely to remarks 
on the purely outward circumstances of her 
life, very often writing only of past times 
and of people she and Maud had known, at 
other times filling her letters, which never 
ceased to be affectionate, with descriptions of 
the scenery she beheld in her occasional 
excursions from Tiioingen. She had pur- 
posely refrained from making Maud her con- 
fidant in what concerned her inward life; 
for, though still retaining the affectionate 
feeling which she associated with Maud, even 
back to her earliest childhood, she had grown 
sensible, during the months they had 
lived together, that Maud could no longer 
be regarded by her as a friend, in the sense 
of one with whom she might safely share 

VOL. I. z 



338 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

every secret of her bosom. Much in the 
characters of both Maud and her father had 
repelled her when she came to observe them 
closely, as indeed was but natural when we 
compare their studied indifference to most of 
the loftier aims of life with Helen's fervour of 
mind and heart. It was thus with something 
of apprehension, on her own side, also, that 
Helen looked forward to her return to 
England. 

The Greshams had not greatly altered 
during the past two years, either in appear- 
ance or habits of life. Mr. Gresham's reputa- 
tion as a successful artist had continued to 
grow, and had brought him an increase of 
wealth, which he regarded by no means the 
least important of its consequences. I have 
not hitherto made any remark with regard 
to his stand-point as an artist, for the reason 
that there was very little to be said there- 
upon. He pursued multifarious branches of 
painting, never making an absolute failure, 
or at all events keeping them secret if he 
did make any, yet never, on the other hand, 
rising to productions which bore the unmis- 
takable stamp of genius. He was possessed 
of considerable talent, without doubt, and 
took a pleasure in his profession, partly- 
sincere, partly the logical outcome of his 
professed philosophy. He had a keen sense 
for the direction of popular taste, and was 
troubled by no subtle scruples with regard to 



THE EX-OLERGYMAN's BEQUEST. 339 

the dignity of his art which might have with- 
held him from availing himself of popular 
favour. Probably few artists of his time 
were more successful, judged by the criterion 
of that substantial approbation which finds 
expression in the expenditure of pounds, 
shillings, and pence. 

For Maud Gresham, now in her twentieth 
year, the intervening time had brought an 
event of some moment, which, however, 
found noplace in the gossipy letters with which 
from time to time she favoured Helen. Maud 
was engaged. It would be scarcely possible 
to conceive of a young lady who had passed 
through the days of wooing with a less 
fluctuating appetite, or who looked forward 
to her approaching marriage with a less 
fluttering heart. Her future husband, by 
name Mr. John Waghorn, she had been 
acquainted with for some two years. Her 
father had originally met him at his Club, had 
found him a gentlemanly kind of man, and 
one apparently possessed of means, and had 
ultimately invited him to dinner. It then 
became known that Mr. Waghorn was a 
railway director, and the suspicion of 
** means'' became a satisfactory certainty. 
Mr. Gresham had intimated to his daughter 
that here was a very eligible match for her; 
Maud had reflected upon the matter and 
came to a similar conclusion ; and an ex- 
tremely gentlemanlike proposal had even- 



340 WOBKEBS m THE DAWN. 

tually made it clear that Mr. Waghorn 
entirely coincided with the views of his 
friend. Should nothing happen to prevent 
it, the marriage would be celebrated during^ 
the August of the present year. 

During all the time that had elapsed since 
the death of Mr. Norman, his friend and 
executor had not once made an effort to 
fulfil the request made in the ex-clergyman's 
will with regard to Arthur Golding. Deem- 
ing such a search impracticable, and sure to 
remain void of result, Mr. Gresham had con- 
stantly procrastinated the performance of 
this duty, always in the intention, however, 
of some day easing his conscience by the 
execution of some such measure as forward- 
ing a communication to the police, or inserting 
advertisements in various newspapers. And 
these steps he did at length take, though not 
till the commencement of May in the present 
year. As sometimes will happen in similar 
cases, the event he had esteemed well-nigh 
impossible actually occurred on the very day 
when he had roused himself to such a per- 
functory discharge of his obligations, and^ 
after all, by a pure piece of chance. On that 
day, as Fate would have it, he discovered 
Arthur Golding. 

Returning homewards on foot from the 
Strand, he took a short cut out of Oxford 
Street by way of Rathbone Place, which 
brought him into Charlotte Place and past 



THE EX-OLEBGYMAN's BEQUEST. 341 

Mr. Tollady's shop door. Glancing up by 
chance into the printer's window, he saw a 
neatly-framed water-colour picture hanging 
there for sale, marked at the modest figure of 
five shillings. The execution of the drawing was 
in some respects remarkable, but this would 
hardly have sufficed to detain him without 
some other source of interest. This, how- 
ever, he found in the picture itself, its subject 
and outline ; for it was a copy of a picture of 
his own which had receutly been exhibited in 
London, and had attracted some attention. 
It was a copy, and yet not a copy ; for while 
the attitudes and countenances of the figures 
were precisely as in the original picture, the 
colouring was altogether different, and indeed 
much more effective. Mr. Gresham regarded 
it with curiosity for some moments, and, 
after a slight hesitation, entered the shop. 
Mr. ToUady was sitting there alone, and he 
rose as the stranger entered. 

" Could you inform me by whom the 
drawing in the window was executed ?" asked 
Mr. Gresham, speaking with that touch of 
aristocratic haughtiness which usually marked 
his speech when directed to those less wealthy 
than himself. 

** It is by a young man who acts as my 
assistant, sir," returned the printer. 

" Is he in the habit of selling pictures ?'* 

"He occupies most of his leisure time 
in drawing and painting ; but this is the first 



342 WOBKEBS IN THE DAWK. 

I have succeeded in persuading him to try 
and sell." 

"Then you can, possibly, tell me ho^v 
this copy was made? I mean, was it 
taken from the original picture, or other- 
wise?" 

" It was made, sir, from an engraving in 
the Illustrated London NewSy which seemed 
to strike my young friend's fancy. He pur- 
posed first to make a copy in crayon, but 
afterwards decided to make it a study of 
colour. He has often expressed a wish to 
see the original, but has had no opportunity.'* 

" I think I could afford him that," said 
Mr. Gresham, with a slight smile. "Will 
you take the picture from the window and 
let me look at it again?" 

The old man obeyed with sincere joy. 
The picture had been hanging for more than 
a month, and as yet no customer had offered. 
The artist took it in his hands and examined 
it closely. 

" May I ask your opinion of its execution, 
sir?" asked Mr. ToUady, closely watching the 
artist's face. 

" It is not bad," returned the other, look- 
ing suddenly into his questioner s face, as 
if he half resented the liberty. " There are 
a few faults in the drawing, and many 
signs of inexperience in the colouring. 
Where has the young man received his in- 
struction?" 



THE BX-OLBRGTMAN*S BEQUEST. 343 

" He has had none whatever, sir/' replied 
Mr. ToUady, in a tone not unmixed with 
pride. " The merit is solely his." 

Mr. Gresham looked up for a moment in 
surprise, but at once changed the look to a 
somewhat supercilious smile. 

"And the demerits likewise, then," he 
said. ** I am glad no one else is responsible." 

"Do you know the original, sir?" asked 
Mr. Tollady, after a moment's silence. 

" I myself painted it," replied the other, 
without looking up from the drawing. 

The old man's heart throbbed high. The 
way in which Mr. Gresham regarded the 
picture began to inspire him with hopes he 
had scarcely dared entertain. 

" If you will put this in paper I will be the 
young man's first patron," said the artist, at 
length, after apparently hesitating. " And, 
what is his name ?" 

" Arthur Golding," replied Mr. Tollady, 
as he took the picture and began to fold it in 
brown paper. 

" What did you say ?" 

" Arthur Golding, sir," repeated the other, 
in some surprise at the earnestness of the 
question. 

Mr. Gresham knitted his brows in a puzzled 
look, and regarded the printer closely. 

" Arthur Golding, eh ? " he said at length. 
" Excuse my curiosity, but has he long been 
your assistant ?" 



344 WOBEEBS IN THE DAWN. 



" Nearly eight years, sir," replied Mr Tol- 
lady, smiling. 

" But how old is he ?" 

" About nineteen.*' 

" H'm. Then he was a mere child when he 
came to you ?" 

" Little more.'* 

Mr. Gresham turned from the counter, 
walked into the doorway, and stood there for 
some moments in reflection. Making up his 
mind, he again faced the printer. 

** The name you have mentioned," he said, 
" is one very familiar to me, and has raised 
my interest in an especial degree. Would 
you have any objection — I leave it, of course, 
entirely to your own discretion — to tell me 
what you know of this young man's history 
previous to his first coming to you ?" 

Mr. ToUady's turn for reflection had now 
come, and he was a minute before he re- 
plied — 

" I think I can have no objection to do so, 
sir," he then said. " Arthur Golding is at 
present out, and will not return for at least 
an hour, or I should have much preferred to 
ask his permission. But as I know he is 
altogether free from false pride, and as you 
have shown so kind an interest in his work, 
I will freely venture to tell you what I know. 
It is included in a very few words. He came 
to me originally in reply to a notice in my 
window that I wanted a boy. He referred 



THE EX-OLERGYMAN*S BEQUEST. 345 

me then for a testimonial to his character to 
a bird-dealer in St. Andrew Street, whose 
name I have forgotten. From him I learnt 
that the boy had been found by a friend 
of his destitute in the street one night, and 
had him brought home and put to bed ; after 
which he had continued to lodge there, earn- 
ing his living by working as errand-boy, or 
something of the kind at a neighbouring shop." 

** But before he was picked up in the 
street ?" asked Mr. Gresham, seeing that the 
other paused. 

" Of that I know very little, for he has 
always been reticent on the subject of his 
earliest years, and I should be loath to pain 
him by asking unpleasant questions. AH I 
actually know is that he suffered the severest 
misery, and that he lived at one time in one 
of the most wretched alleys ofE Whitecross 
Street, in the City." 

"Ah, he didl" ejaculated Mr. Gresham, 
who saw Arthur's identity confirmed by this 
last particular. " Well, it is a somewhat 
singular thing, but I have for some time had 
an interest in discovering an Arthur Geld- 
ing, and have, not an hour ago, sent adver- 
tisements to various newspapers, addressed 
to him, if he should be living. From what 
you tell me, I feel pretty sure that you have 
saved me further trouble. Did he ever speak 
to you, bye-the-by, of a gentleman called Mr* 
Norman ?" 



346 WOBKRRS IN THE DAWN. 

" I have no recollection of the name." 

" Nor of a town called Bloomf ord ?'' 

" I think, never.'' 

** Very possibly not ; it was merely an idea^ 
that occurred to me. May I trouble you for 
your own name ? " 

" My name is Samuel Tollady, sir. 

" Very well, Mr. Tollady ; I will leave my 
card with you, and I shall feel obliged if you 
will allow your assistant, Arthur Golding, to 
call and see me, any time after six this 
evening. I may possibly show him the 
original of his drawing. Bye-the-by, you 
might give me some idea of his character. 
Pretty fair ?" 

" I have regarded him as my son, sir," re- 
plied Mr. Tollady, *' for so many years that I 
feel as if it were hardly right for me to praise 
him. Nevertheless, I will say that I have 
never known him guilty of a mean or dis- 
honourable action, and I believe that he 
would lose his life sooner than commit 
either." 

" Strong expressions, those, Mr. Tollady/^ 
replied the other, with his sceptical smile. 
" I am glad you told me that you regard him 
as a son ; otherwise I might have — well, 
have given less credit to your judgment 
than I am still disposed to do. Good morn- 
mg. 

Mr. Tollady, left alone, pursued his work 
with a lighter heart and a more cheerful 



THE ex-clergyman's BEQUEST. 347 

look than had been his for many years. I 
say pursued his work ; but during the hour 
which intervened between Mr. Grresham's de- 
parture and Arthur's return from his absence 
on a business matter, he was indeed scarcely 
capable of applying himself to anything. He 
walked up and down the shop rubbing his 
hands together in his delight, knitting his 
brows in the puzzle of wondering what could 
be the artist's hidden connection with Arthur, 
and turning over and over in his pocket the 
five shillings which Mr. Graham had paid for 
the picture. 

How should he announce the news to 
Arthur ? He knew very well that the absence 
of his picture from the window would at once 
strike the young man on his entrance, and 
this would exact an immediate explanation. 
Yet he scarcely knew how he should preserve 
the calmness necessary to give it. Be it 
noted, that in contemplating the conse- 
quences of this event, Mr. Tollady only 
thought of their advantages to Arthur. 

During the last two years, since Arthur 
had been able to take an active share in the 
business, things had looked up again at the 
old printing-shop, and prospects were now 
much brighter than they had been for many 
years. In pondering on the morning's events 
it appeared to Mr. Tollady as quite a natural 
thing that Arthur should forthwith leave the 
shop ; but nothing was further from hia 



348 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

mind tlian the least thought of selfish regret 
on this account. Such was not Samuel 
ToUady's nature. 

After a delay which seemed several hours 
instead of only one, Mr. Tollady's anxious 
ear caught the sound of a well-known, light, 
quick step on the pavement outside, and the 
next moment Arthur Golding entered the 
shop. 

He had grown to be tall for his age, and 
the promise of his boyhood was already ful- 
filling itself in his appearance as a young 
man. An abundance of hair, which was 
still light and wavy, hung about a face in 
which handsome and manly outlines blended 
with an expression of serious thoughtfulness 
which at once struck one as remarkable. It 
was not the face of a robust and healthy 
youth, but decidedly pale and a trifle thin, 
and the ceaseless motion of his large blue 
eyes gave him somewhat of the restless 
appearance of one who is urged to constant 
activity and exertion by impulses from 
within. 

*'Well," he exclaimed, in a full, joyous 
voice, as he entered the shop, " it is all 
right, Mr. ToUady. I have got the order !" 

" Have you, my dear boy ? I am glad of 
it — I am glad of it." 

The old man kept pacing up and down the 
shop, laughing inwardly, and quite surpris- 
ing Arthur by the vividness of his delight* 



THE EX-OLE BGYMAN's BEQUEST, 349 

He had never seen him so pleased before at 
the mere acquisition of an order, and could 
scarcely understand it. 

Mr. ToUady himself kept glancing towards 
the window, where the picture had hitherto 
hung, in the hope of attracting the young man's 
attention thither, but still without success. 

" Well, come !" he exclaimed, at length. 
" As you have got the order, Arthur, it is 
only fair you should have some commission. 
What shall it be? Suppose we say five 
shillings — five shillings, eh ?" 

As he spoke he took the two half-crowns 
from his pocket, and pressed them into 
Arthur's hand. 

Then a sudden idea of the old man's mean- 
ing flashed across the other's mind. He 
turned rapidly towards the window, and at 
once perceived that his drawing was not 
there. 

"It is gone ! You have sold it !" ex- 
claimed Arthur, with boyish delight, press- 
ing one of Mr. ToUady's hands in both his 
own. " To whom ? Tell me ! How did it 
happen?" 

For a few moments the old man was un- 
able to speak ; but at length he summoned 
the resolution to begin his story. 

As he proceeded, Arthur's astonishment 
kept pace with the narrator's delight, and 
"when he knew the whole a serious expression 
rested upon his countenance. 



350 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" What do you say the name on the card 
is ? " he asked. " Gresham ? '* 

" Yes, Gresham. Can you recall it ?" 

" Not in the least," replied Arthur, plunged 
in thought. 

' " Do you recall the name of Norman ? '* 
asked Mr. ToUady, after a slight hesita- 
tion. 

Arthur raised his head suddenly. 

" Yes, I do ; I recall it perfectly. For 
years I have lost it. Mr. Norman was a 
clergyman." 

" I suppose you knew him some time before 
you met with me ? " 

" Forgive me, Mr. Tollady," exclaimed 
Arthur, ** for never having told you of this, 
I imagined it was an incident buried away in 
my old, miserable life, and little dreamt it 
would ever be spoken of again." 

Arthur then related, in few words, and as 
well as he could remember the details, the 
story of his brief acquaintance with Mr. Nor- 
man at Bloomford, naturally exaggerating 
much which he barely retained of the far-off 
memories of childhood, but giving a true and 
vivid account of that uneasy yearning in his 
child's heart, that longing for a sight of his 
dead and gone father, and all the vague rest- 
lessness to which it gave rise, which had 
ultimately led to his running away from 
Bloomford. 

Having completed his confidence, Arthur 



THE BX-OLERGYMAN's BEQUEST. 351 

then went to work for a few hours at ** case," 
leaving Mr. Tollady to his reflections. 

At the stated hour, Arthur took his way 
towards Portland Place, discovered the 
number, and rang the visitor's bell. It was 
not without much natural tremulation that he 
found himself standing in the imposing door- 
way of what was a palace compared to any 
house he had ever entered. One moment he 
almost hoped they had not heard his ring, 
and that it might be possible to retreat unob- 
served to his life of happy obscurity ; but 
bolder thoughts soon came to his assistance. 
The democratic education he had received 
told him that though this man might be 
wealthy, he was not necessarily an object of 
awe, or even of respect. As an able artist he 
might command deference, and that Arthur 
felt it would be no indignity to show. But 
as for his big house and his portentous 
door-bells, pooh I "A man's a man for a' 
that I " 

A servant in livery at length opened the 
door, and, evidently apprised of Arthur's 
expected arrival, at once requested him to 
walk in. He then led the way upstairs, 
treading noiselessly with slippered feet, till 
he arrived before a door concealed behind a 
heavy green curtain. The curtain he drew 
back, and requested Arthur to step in, in- 
forming him that he would apprise Mr. Q-res- 
ham of his presence. 



352 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" What a dreadful house to live in ! " was 
Arthur's first thought, when left alone. The 
very air seemed oppressed by the weight of 
the luxury through which he had passed 
merely in ascending the stairs. The absolute 
silence which reigned throughout, scarcely 
broken by the affected whisper of the foot- 
man, seemed to assail his ears more painfully 
than the most intolerable noise. And now he 
looked around and surveyed the room he 
found himself in. The first glance showed 
him that it was a studio. An artist's studio I 
How the recollection of all the studios he had 
ever read of flashed across his mind, dazzling^ 
his perceptions with unnumbered rays of 
glory. How often had he seen studios in the 
spirit — the studios of the great masters, to 
his imagination more sacred than any holy of 
holies reared by human superstition ; but 
with how faint a hope of ever sating his 
bodily eyes with the appearance of an actual 
one. 

Eagerly he gazed round at the multifarious 
objects which met his look. The room was a 
spacious one, round in shape, and lighted from 
above, where there was a species of glass dome, 
shaded on one side by a movable curtain^ 
which allowed no ray to pass in that direc- 
tion. Three or four large easels stood in the 
centre, each bearing an unfinished picture, 
one of a considerable size. On the walls 
hung a number of looking-glasses, also an 



THE EX-CLERGIMAN's BEQUEST. 353 

abundance of framed sketches, studies, oil 
and water-colour pictures. 

In one comer lay a heap of armour, very 
brightly polished, together with a few 
sheathed swords, and one or two enormous 
feathers. Against the wall, in another comer, 
hung a quantity of various-coloured robes* 
Everywhere were canvases, either finished, 
about to be finished, or never to be finished 
— canvases, as it seemed to Arthur, by hun-» 
dreds. 

As for the multitude of small articles of 
luxury which were scattered about the room 
on every available space, his eyes refused to 
take note of them individually. The furni- 
ture of the room consisted of massive 
antique chairs and tables, and the fire-place 
was surmounted by a lofty mantel-piece of 
dark oak, marvellously carved in elaborate 
foliage, the whole a masterpiece. Then, 
standing on a small table near to one of the 
easels, he observed the colour-boxes, pallets, 
sheaves of brushes, together with a multitude 
of small appliances of which he knew neither 
the name nor the use. Hismouth watered at 
the sight. 

Surveying in turn the pictures hanging 
on, or leaning against the walls, he can>e at 
length to one at the sight of which he 
started in surprise. It was the picture 
which he had copied by means of the engrav- 
ing; the subject, Arviragus coming forth 

VOL. I. 2 a 



354 WORKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

from the cave with the corpse of Traogen in 
his arms, whilst Belarius and Guiderius re- 
gard him with surprise and grief. As he 
stood earnestly examining every feature and 
each tint, to compare it with his own execu- 
tion, he was startled by a cough close behind 
him. Turning, he found that Mr. Gresham 
had entered unobserved. 

" You have discovered the * Imogen,'" said 
the artist, extending his hand to his visitor, 
and regarding him at the same time with a 
critical look. 

" I was thinking how little I understand 
of art, and how I had spoilt the picture for 
want of skill in colouring." 

The speech was very well adapted to secure 
favour, bub it was in no calculating spirit that 
Arthur uttered it. He spoke, as he always 
did, the veritable thoughts of his heart. 

" Perhaps you underrate your skill," re- 
turned Mr. Gresham, disposed to be gra- 
cious; " but it is not of that we have first to 
speak. Let us sit down. Now you will, in 
all probability, be prepared for my first 
question. Have you any objection to tell me 
precisely what you can remember of your 
life previous to your acquaintance with that 
bird-catcher, bird-trainer — whatever the man 
was — who lived Seven Dials way ? " 

Arthur replied that he had no objection 
whatever, and proceeded once again to relate 
those painful passages of his early years with 



THK EX-OLRRGYMAN's BEQUEST. 355 

whicli the reader is well acquainted. When 
he had finished, Mr. Gresham reflected a little. 

"You have not heard of Mr. Norman since 
you left him in that — that somewhat abrupt 
manner ? " he asked at length, with the 
touch of sarcasm seldom absent from his 
speech. 

" Never," replied Arthur. 

"Very well. Then I must tell you that 
Mr. Norman died some three years ago, 
abroad. I was with him at the time of his 
death, and one of his last requests to me 
was that I should endeavour to re-discover 
you." 

Arthur looked up in the utmost surprise. 

" I have no doubt," proceeded Mr. Gres- 
ham, " that I have now fulfilled his wish, so 
far. May I ask you what is the nature of 
your plans as regards the future ? " 

** I have never reflected much upon them," 
replied Arthur, "for I have grown accus- 
tomed to regard my future as inseparably 
connected with Mr. ToUady. I have learned 
printing from him, and, if he should die, I 
have always the means thereby of earning my 
living." 

" If he should die," repeated the artist, 
with a rather unfeeling emphasis. " He 
appeared to me rather an old man." 

" He is an old man," said Arthur, with 
some sadness in his tone. 

There was silence for some moments, 



356 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

during which Mr. Gresham cast side 
glances at his companion, and seemed to be 
in some doubt how to proceed. 

** What made you first think of drawing ? '* 
he asked, at length. 

" I can scarcely say. I have always been 
fond of it, as long, almost, as I can remem- 
ber." 

" You have never received lessons of any 
kind?" 

"None at all." 

" Should you be inclined to take advan- 
tage of the opportunity of obtaining in- 
struction, in case it presented itself ?" 

" I should be glad to do so," replied the 
young man, with warmth. 

Again Mr. Gresham paused, and this time 
he rose and paced the room. 

" Mr. Norman," he began again, resuming 
his seat, ''appears to have taken consider- 
able interest in your welfare, Mr. Golding ; 
so much, indeed, that in his will he left some 
little provision for you, in the event of my 
being successful in the search." 

Arthur gazed at the speaker with uncon- 
cealed astonishment. 

'* You are surprised ! Well, it remains 
with you to justify the hopes which seem 
to have prompted Mr. Norman's kindness. 
We will say nothing at present of the details 
of the bequest. Suppose I were to under- 
take to supply you with sufficient money to 



THE EX-OLERGYMAN's BEQUEST. 357 

live upon, without the assistance of your own 
work, and to superintend your studies during 
an hour or two each day here in my own 
studio, would you be content to devote your- 
self entirely to art, and to pursue it in the 
manner I should suggest?" 

For several minutes Arthur remained silent, 
experiencing sensations which deprived him 
of the power of rational thought. Conceive 
his situation. A youth of high spirit and 
lofty ambitions, inspired, though he knew it 
not, with the breath of genius, whose life 
hitherto had been hemmed between the nar- 
rowest bounds, who had pictured for his 
pleasure the most glowing futures, without 
the hope of ever rising above a scant subsis- 
tence, procured by persevering manual work, 
for him to be thus suddenly, and without 
warning, presented with the chance of realis- 
ing his most rapturous dream — a life devoted 
exclusively to the study of his beloved art ; 
it was, indeed, too much for his brain to en- 
compass. He stood unable to reply. 

*'Well, what do you think?" said the 
artist, reading with amusement the thoughts 
which impressed themselves on the young 
man's ingenuous features. 

'* I fear I could not reply without — without 
reflection," said Arthur ; " but no — I know 
I could not fulfil these conditions. If I were 
to withdraw from our business, Mr. Tollady 
would be unable to carry it on alone." 



858 WORKERS IN THE DAWN, 



** But he might obtain some one else." 

" No one else, I fear, who — who would suit 
him. No, sir ; in any case I should be unable 
to devote myself entirely to art." 

" Could you spare some two or three hours 
each morning ? " 

" I — I fear not. It would be impossible for 
me to say without consulting Mr. ToUady." 

"Is Mr. Tollady's business extensive ?"^ 
asked Mr. Gresham, with a smile. 

" It is not very large, sir ; but I am glad 
to say it has been improving lately." 

" Bye-the-by, where did you receive your 
education — reading and writing, you know?'* 

*' I owe it almost entirely to Mr. ToUady,'^ 
replied Arthur. " He has been my father 
ever since I have known him. It would be 
impossible to over-estimate my indebtedness, 
to him." 

" I fancy Mr. Tollady must be a somewhat 
notable man," said Mr. Gresham, with his 
peculiar smile. ''Well, I think we have 
talked enough for the present. The best 
thing you can do will be to return home and 
acquaint Mr. Tollady with the propositions I 
have made to you. Talk the matter over 
together. Then come to see me again to- 
morrow, at the same time, and let me know 
the results you have arrived at. Will you 
do so?" 

" I will, sir." 

" And, bye-the-by, bring me up a few of 



THE EX-OLBEGYMAN's BEQUEST. 359 

your drawings — ^your ordinary work, you 
know. I shall be better able to judge of 
your ability from them." 

So the interview ended, and Arthur re- 
turned to Charlotte Place, so distracted with 
contending emotions that he was quite un- 
conscious of the streets he passed through, 
several times missing his way, and being 
roused at length by surprise when he heard 
Mr. ToUady speaking to him from the door-» 
way of the shop. 

Meanwhile Mr. Gresham had left his studio 
and descended to the library, where he found 
Maud writing a letter in the twilight, for it 
was after seven o'clock. 

''To Helen ?'* he asked, standing on the 
hearth-rug with his hands behind him. 

Maud nodded, but did not look up. 

'* Have you told her of my discovery?" 

" I am just doing so. Has he been yet ? *' 

" Just gone." 

•'Well?" 

" Well ?" repeated Mr. Gresham, feigning 
not to catch her meaning. 

" What is the verdict ? " 

•'Rather favourable, on the whole. In- 
deed, considering his antecedents, T should 
say that he bears a wonderful resemblance to 
a gentleman." 

*' Without, of course," returned Maud, 
"exciting the least suspicion that he really 
may be a gentleman ? " 



360 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

" I wouldn't commit myself to a decided 
opinion yet," returned her father, smiling. 

"And what do you intend to do with 
him ? " asked Maud, after writing on for a few 
minutes. 

** To tell you the truth, Maudie, I find it a 
trifle difficult to decide. At all events, I 
have offered him the chance of taking lessons 
here, and I fancy he will be much tempted to 
accept." 

'' It doesn't ever strike you, papa, that you 
may be doing a very foolish thing ?" 

'* How so, Miss Gresham?" 

" Wouldn't it be much better for this 
young man to keep to his tailoring, or shoe- 
making, or whatever else it is he has been 
brought up to, without having his head dis- 
turbed with fancies which can never come to 
anything ?" 

" Pray be accurate, my dear. In the first 
place he is neither a tailor nor a shoemaker, 
but a printer ; secondly, I beg to tell yoa 
that he possesses a most uncommon talent, 
and the fancies, as you term them, may not 
improbably result in something very sub- 
stantial indeed." 

" Oh, I have no desire to damp your phi- 
lanthropy, papa," returned Maud, with a sly 
look. *'It is somewhat novel to find you 
taking such an absorbing interest in a sans 
culottes.^ ^ 

" You are severe. Miss Gresham." 



THE EX-CLEBGYMAN's BEQUEST. 361 

" Not at all, papa. Do you authorise me to 
tell Helen what you say with regard to — to 
the foundling?" 

" Just as you please. It will help to fill 
up the letter. ' 

"Do we dine alone, papa?" asked Maud, 
rising at length from her seat. 

" Waghorn promised to drop in. I saw him 
at the Club this afternoon." 

** Oh, bother the man ! He is here per- 
petually." 

" In a month or so, Maud, you are likely to 
find his society still more perpetual." 

** Pooh I That will be a different thing. 
Don't stand all night in the dark there, papa. 
You seem unusually thoughtful to-night, 
and it doesn't become you." 



CHAPTER XVL 



THE STUDIO. 



Notwithstanding Maud's parting injunction^ 
Mr. Gresham still remained for some time in 
the gathering darkness of the library, plunged 
in thought of a description somewhat un- 
usual to him. 

The subject of his meditation was Maud 
herself. That last remark of hers in reference 
to her future husband had, he scarcely knew 
why, jarred most unpleasantly upon his ear. 
For the first time he asked himself seriously 
whether this marriage of his daughter with 
Mr. Waghorn was a prudent one, or likely to 
be a happy one. In vain he represented 
to himself that Waghorn was undoubtedly a 
highly respectable man — a railway director, 
to boot — and that Maud had exhibited no 
repugnance whatever for the match ; indeed 
that she had been left to her own will entirely 
in the matter. He could not restore his mind 
to that state of calm indifferentism which it 
was his habit to pursue. He reflected upon 
his own marriage. It had been a happy one, 
he thought; yes, he certainly thought so; 
for the truth of the matter was, that his wife 



THE STUDIO. 363 

had been a helpless, good-hearted, inoffensive 
child, with whom scarcely the most refractory 
husband could have had the brutality to 
quarrel. 

In all probability, he thought, Maud had 
no particular affection for her intended hus- 
band ; but what matter, so long as she did not 
absolutely dislike him ? It was a highly re- 
spectable match. 

" Pooh, pooh !" exclaimed Mr. Gresham, 
at length, and went to dinner. The mood had 
passed away. 

Mr. Gresham had been more favourably 
impressed with Arthur Golding than, in 
accordance with his usual habit, he had seen 
fit to declare. He looked forward with some 
pleasure to his return on the ensuing even- 
ing, and, when he arrived, was awaiting him 
in the studio. Arthur had a large portfolio 
under his arm. 

''You have brought me some drawings to 
look at?" said the artist. Let me see." 

He took the portfolio, laid it open upon 
the table, and proceeded to examine the con- 
tents, whilst Arthur stood regarding the 
pictures on the wall, from time to time steal- 
ing a glance at Mr. Gresham in an endeavour 
to observe the effect the drawings were pro- 
ducing upon him. 

** Some of these are by no means bad," 
said the latter, at length, '* considering the 
circumstances under which they were pro- 



364 WOBKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

duced. Well, did you discuss the matter 
with Mr. Tollady ?" 

Arthur replied that he had done so. He 
did not say, however, that in doing so, he 
had made no mention of the pecuniary cir- 
cumstances, and had merely spoken of Mr. 
Gresham's offer to give him lessons for an 
hour or two each day. 

" And what was the result ?'' asked the 
artist. 

" We fear that it would be impossible for 
me to cease working in the office altogether ; 
but Mr. Tollady is very anxious that I should 
accept your kind offer to direct me in my 
studies." 

" Well, I will tell you, Mr. Golding,'' said 
the artist, " precisely ray opinion on this 
affair. I have carefully examined your draw- 
ings, and I feel sure that you possess ability, 
which, if rightly directed, Avill make you an 
eminent and successful artist. But you no 
doubt understand that ability alone is of little 
good without careful training. Your draw- 
ings are very clever, there is no denying it ; 
but, if I chose, I could pick holes in them 
after a manner you wouldn't thank me 
for. And this merely because your taste has 
not been trained properly. Now if I under- 
take to instruct you in these things you lack, 
you understand it would be with the inten- 
tion of making an artist of you. That to 
become an artist, you must be able to devote 



THE STUDIO. 365 

all your time to your art. Now, what is to 
be done ?" 

" Then I am sorry, sir," replied Arthur, 
" but I fear it is useless for me to think of 
becoming an artist. My duty must come 
before my inclinations/' 

" But is it not one's first duty to consider 
one's own future?" asked Mr. Gresham, look- 
ing at Arthur from under his eyebrows. 

" Not in such a manner as to inflict injury 
upon others," replied Arthur, firmly. 

'* And you would be content to resign the 
glories of a successful artist's life merely be- 
cause your preparation for such would give 
Mr. Tollady a little inconvenience?" 

'* You do not know Mr. Tollady, sir," re- 
plied Arthur, with a touch of indignation in 
nis tone. '* He would gladly submit to any 
inconvenience if he thought it for my benefit; 
but I could not accept such a sacrifice. It 
would not merely be inconvenience to him if 
I were to desert hisbusinessnow, it would be a 
serious loss ; for circumstances have made 
me very useful to him. I must not think of 
taking such a step ; 1 could not." 

" You are young, Mr. Golding," said the 
artist, with his peculiar smile. '* If you live 
another twenty years your views of hfe will 
change." 

" Never, I trust, in this particular !" ex- 
claimed Arthur. 

"I see a number of drawings from casts 



366 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

here/' said Mr. Gresham, turning suddenly 
round to the portfolio. '* Did you purchase 
the models ?" 

" Mr. ToUady has bought me them from 
time to time, sir.^ 

" And when do you work at them ?" 

" In the evenings and early in the morning." 

" When do you usually rise ?" 

" At five, sir." 

" And go to bed ?" 

" Generally a little before midnight." 

" Have you any design upon your life, Mr. 
Golding?" 

" Habit has made those hours easy to me," 
replied Arthur, with a smile. 

" Yesterdav," resumed the artist, after a 
short pause, " I referred to a legacy of Mr. 
Norman's. I think it is time to speak of it 
in detail. Mr. Norman left you in his will 
the sum of five thousand pounds." 

Arthur kept his eyes fixed upon the floor, 
and made no reply. 

" The money," pursued Mr. Gresham, " is 
invested in Three per cent. Consols, and pro- 
duces accordingly a hundred and fifty pounds 
a year. You could almost live on that, Mr. 
Golding?" 

Probably Mr. Gresham had no intention of 
looking fiendish when he spoke these words ; 
but an observer could scarcely have helped 
associating his expression of face with that of 
a diabolical tempter. 



THE STUDIO. 367 

Arthur still held his eyes down and made 
no reply. 

" Discretion is left to me in the will," pur- 
sued the artist, " with regard to the disposal 
of this money till you reach your twenty- 
first year. If you think it desirable, I will 
direct that the half-yearly dividends shall be 
paid to you henceforth." 

Still Arthur made no reply. 

" Perhaps I am taking you at an unfair 
advantage," said Mr. Gresham, after watch- 
ing the young man with an amused face for 
several minutes. " Suppose you were to ask 
my advice on this point. I am in a certain 
sense, you see, your guardian." 

" I should gladly listen to your advice, 
sir," said Arthur, raising a pale and anxious 
face to his questioner. 

" It shall be sincere, then. Listen ! As 
you conceive that to give up your printing 
would be an unjustifiable injury to Mr. 
ToUady, suppose you reconcile your doubts 
in this way. Say to Mr. ToUady : * I find it 
is very desirable that I should have all my 
time to devote to my art studies. In place, 
therefore, of working myself in the business 
for the future, I will become a sleeping 
partner, advancing towards our joint expenses 
of every kind the sum of a hundred and fifty 
pounds a year. With this we shall be able 
to employ another man in my stead, and I 
^hall esteem my board and lodging as quite 



368 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

adequate interest upon my money,* I am 
well aware that this would be a peculiar- 
arrangement under ordinary circumstances,, 
but between yourself and Mr. ToUady it 
might possibly exist/' 

** Nothing would please me so much as to 
use my money for Mr. Tollady's advantage," 
replied Arthur : " but I very much fear be 
could not be brought to accept it.'' 

"Mr. ToUady has, probably, maturer views 
of life than yourself, Mr. Golding," said Mr» 
Gresham, smiling. 

" I am sure, sir," replied Arthur, " it is 
quite impossible for any man to be more 
nobly disinterested in all his views. Had he 
been of a less benevolent nature he would be 
a far richer man than he is." 

" Do you mean he employs much money in 
charity ?" 

" More than he can afford to. I know his 
life would be valueless to him if he lost the 
means of relieving suffering." 

" I fear there are not many such men," said 
the artist, with concealed irony. 

" It is impossible there should be," replied 
Arthur. " The world would not be so miser- 
able as it is." 

" Do you find it miserable ? On the whole, 
it appears to me a sufficiently agreeable 
spot." 

" You view it as a wealthy man, sir," re- 
plied Arthur, surprised at his own boldness. 



TBB STUDIO. 369 

but feeling impelled to speak. "You see 
only the bright side of life ; into the dark- 
ness which envelopes the majority of man- 
kind you never penetrate, the scorn or disgust 
which it excites in you is too strong. Could 
you view a tenth of the hopeless depravity, 
the unspeakable wretchedness, which we who 
live in a poor quarter have daily before our 
eyes, it would render you unhappy for the 
rest of your life." 

*' I must not detract from your estimation 
of my humanity," replied Mr. Gresham. 
" But let us stick to the matter in hand. Do 
you think it would be of any use if I saw Mr. 
ToUady personally, and endeavoured to bring 
him round to our plans ?" 

"But I beg," interposed Arthur, "that 
you will not consider me to have given my 
absolute consent. In any case I must neces- 
sarily have a few hours of leisure time 
during each day, and you would not object 
to my employing these in Mr. ToUady's 
affairs ?" 

" That will, of course, be your own busi- 
ness. I think we shall find a way out of 
the diflBculty. In the meantime, will you 
do me the favour of dining with me ? Then 
we will go together and see Mr. ToUady after 
dinner." 

Arthur started at the unexpected invitation, 
and was on the point of making a hurried 
and awkward excuse, when Mr. Gresham, 

VOL. I, 2 b 



370 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

who was by no means deficient in agreeable 
tact, when he chose to exercise it, perceivings 
his embarrassment, hastened to reassure him. 

"My daughter and myself are alone to- 
night, and dinner under such circumstances 
is apt to lack conversation. You have no 
pressing engagement ? " 

Arthur could not allege that he had, and 
Mr. Gresham turned to show the way from 
the room. 

'* Bye-the-by," he remarked, as they passed 
out of the studio, " do you remember Mis& 
Norman, the little girl at the Rectory, as she 
was in those days ? " 

" I remember her distinctly," replied 
Arthur. '' One circumstance has especially 
fixed itself in my memory, that of our having 
once looked over a book of engravings to- 
gether, which gave me great delight." 

" You were an artist even then ? " returned 
Mr. Gresham. *'Miss Norman will be with 
us in a short time. She has been studying in 
Germany for a couple of years." 

As he spoke they entered the dining-room,, 
where Maud awaited them. Arthur was duly- 
presented, and got through the business in a 
very creditable manner. His natural grace 
of demeanour never suffered him to be abso- 
lutely awkward in his movements, but the 
deep blush upon his features told how keenly 
he felt the unwonted nature of his position. 

** How delightfully you have altered papa's- 



THE STUDIO. 371 

picture ! " exclaimed Maud, as they assumed 
their seats at table, the wonted expression of 
the corners of her lips rendering it uncertain 
how she meant the remark to be interpreted. 
*' I really scarcely recognised it in your beau- 
tiful little water-colour." 

** The alterations were due to my not 
having seen the original picture," replied 
Arthur, in his tone of manly modesty. " I 
made the copy from an engraving, and had to 
trust to my imagination for the colouring/' 

" Our imaginations are wonderfully use- 
ful ; are they not, papa ? *' proceeded Miss 
Gresham. " Life would be scarcely tolerable 
without them.*' 

''I thought. Miss Gresham," said her 
father, " you rather prided yourself upon 
your actuality." 

'' Very possibly," replied Maud, ** but that 
does not exclude a very useful employment 
for my imagination. By means of it I gauge 
the sufferings of those whose imagination is 
too powerful, and derive consolation from the 
contrast." 

Conversation was maintained with more or 
less vivacity till the dessert was being laid,, 
when a servant announced that Mr. Waghorn 
had called. 

" Oh, ask him to come in here," said Mr. 
Gresham. " He is just in time for dessert. 
Mr. Waghorn is one of our especial friends^ 
Mr. Golding." 



372 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

Mr. John Waghom entered. He was rather 
a tall man, partly bald, and, to judge from 
his features, about thirty-six or thirty-seven. 
The appearance .was intensely respectable, 
from the scanty locks carefully brushed for- 
ward on each side of the forehead, down to 
the immaculate boots which made no sound 
upon the carpet. He was in evening dress, 
and wore an exceedingly massive gold chain, 
supporting a wonderable number of valuable 
seals. In body he showed a tendency to 
stoutness, and one observed that his fingers 
were short and chubby. He had a very full 
beard, but no moustache. The outlines of 
his face could hardly be called agreeable ; 
and there was an expression in the dull eye 
and the rather thick lips which denoted a 
sensual temperament ; whilst the narrow and 
retreating forehead was suggestive of no very- 
liberal supply of brains. For all that, Mr. 
Waghorn's appearance was intensely respect- 
able. He bore the stamp of a wealthy man 
on every part of his person. A certain habit 
he had of drawing in the lips and suddenly- 
shooting them out again somehow conveyed 
an impression of the aftertaste of good 
dinners. Stepping up to the table with an 
astonishingly polite air, he shook hands with 
Mr. and Miss Gresham, and bowed to Arthur 
Golding, then assumed the seat indicated by 
IS^r. Gresham, which was over against Arthur. 

Why did this man's face appear familiar to 



THE STUDIO. 373 

Arthur ? He felt sure that he did not now 
see it for the first time, but, though he racked 
his brains to discover when he and Mr. 
Waghorn could by any possibility have met, 
the effort was quite in vain. The countenance 
excited in him feelings of intense repulsion, 
though he had no idea why. He felt in- 
stinctively that beneath that smooth outside 
of immaculate respectability lay hidden secret 
depths of foulness and all impurity. He felt 
uncomfortable in the man's presence, and 
when he discerned, as he soon did, that closer 
relation than mere acquaintanceship existed 
between him and Miss Gresham, he ex- 
perienced, involuntarily, a keen sensation of 
pity for the young lady. 

Mr. Waghorn s conversation was, like his 
appearance, eminently respectable. His 
object in looking in this evening, he said, had 
been to request his friends' company in his 
box at the opera. " Lucia di Lammermuir " 
was to be played, he informed them, and 
thereupon gave utterance to a number of 
most respectable criticisms of the piece, such 
as may be heard in the mouth of any re- 
spectable gentleman during the opera season. 
Here Miss Gresham made a diversion by 
asking Mr. Golding if he liked Scott, and 
upon Arthur replying that he read Scott 
with exceeding pleasure, Mr. Waghorn broke 
in, if so boisterous an expression may be 
applied to his velvety-tongued discourse, with 



374 WOEKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

the remark that he supposed his hearers 
knew that the Waverley Novels had remained 
for a long time anonymous, and how very 
curious it was that such should have been the 
case. Upon Mr. Gresham's entertaining the 
company with a few rather more interesting 
remarks in reference to the same subject, Mr. 
"Waghorn said that he had heard on very 
good authority that Lord So-and-So had just 
completed a novel, which he seriously thought 
of publishing; and upon Maud's observing, 
somewhat satirically, that she was glad his 
lordship was reflecting upon the point before 
coming to his ultimate decision, Mr. Waghorn 
replied that he echoed Miss Gresham's senti- 
ments, for the reading public were so deplor- 
ably inappreciative now-a-days. And so the 
conversation continued to the end of dessert, 
when, Mr. Gresham excusing himself from 
the opera, Maud proposed that she should 
despatch a note to a friend a few doors off, 
begging her to make up the trio. This was 
accordingly done, the friend yielded her 
gracious assent, and she. Miss Gresham, and 
Mr. Waghorn drove off in the latter s carriage 
to the opera. 

Mr. Gresham and Arthur Golding then set 
out to walk to Charlotte Place, where they 
found Mr. Tollady standing in the doorway 
of his shop, awaiting Arthur, whose long 
absence somewhat surprised him. All retired 
to the back-parlour, and there discussed the 



THE STQDIO. 375 

■ 

proposition which Mr. Greshara brought for- 
ward. Mr. ToUady would not at first listen 
to the proposal that Arthur should surrender 
his money to him, but on the latter and Mr. 
Gresham's representing to him that it was in 
reality an investment in the business which 
Arthur wished to make, in return for which 
he obtained the necessaries of life in any case, 
and, perhaps, some share of subsequent 
profits, the printer, though reluctantly, ceased 
his opposition. He showed to Mr. Gresham 
that, considering the modesty of Arthur's 
wants, the hundred and fifty pounds a year 
would quite suffice to supply them all and to 
pay for the services of a new assistant as 
well, and would only consent to the arrange- 
ment in case Arthur would make a definite 
stipulation to accept a certain percentage 
upon the profits that might result. In this 
way, at length, the matter was settled, and 
Mr. Gresham, after bidding Arthur to visit 
him in Portland Place at ten o'clock on the 
following morning, took his leave. 

" I don't like it, Arthur ; I don't like it," 
said Mr. Tollady, after pacing the little room 
for some time in silence. " I shall become a 
dead-weight upon you, holding you back from 
no one knows what advantages. You will 
regret having thus disposed of your money ; 
I fear you will, Arthur." 

" Never," exclaimed the young man. " You 
know well, Mr. Tollady, how often we have 



376 WORKERS IN THE DAWN. 

said that a little capital in our business was 
what we chiefly wanted. It will be a gain in 
every way. Do not think that I shall desert 
you, even when you get the new man. I 
shall find many an hour to look after office 
work ; and you have often said that I had 
good ideas in business matters. And then I 
shall every day be making progress in my art. 
I feel like a new man to-day ! Oh, how I 
will work, work, work ! When shall I have 
my first picture in the Academy ? It shall 
not be long, I assure you. Why, have I not 
already begun to earn money for my pictures ? 
Here, Mr. Tollady, take these five shillings 
you gave me to-day. Take them and do any- 
thing you like with them ; I beg you to ! I 
will make a resolution that all the money I 
henceforth earn by my paintings I will put 
into your hands, to be used as you think best. 
I could not dispose of it better ! " 

'' Stop, stop, my dear boy ! " cried Mr^ 
Tollady, with a smile, at once pleased and 
pained. '' Why, Arthur, you will never get 
on in the world if you give away all your 
money in that fashion. You would always be 
miserably poor, and if there is any curse 
which I would fervently hope and trust may 
be averted from you, it is that of a weary^ 
grinding, life-long poverty. Besides, you 
speak as if I should live for ever. You 
forget that I am close upon my sixtieth 
year, and that I cannot hope to share your 



THE STUDIO. 377 

hopes and your triumphs for very much 
longer." 

" Nonsense ! " exclaimed Arthur, who was 
in wonderfully high spirits. " You shall live 
to see me R.A. yet ! Don't shake your head, 
Mr. ToUady ; I tell you, you shall ! " 

" Arthur," began the old man, in a grave 
voice, the smile dying away from his worn 
features. He seemed on the point of com- 
municating something which lay upon his 
mind, but suddenly he ceased, and shook his 
head. 

''What were you going to say?" asked 
Arthur. 

" Nothing, my dear boy, except that I am 
heartily glad of this piece of good fortune 
that has befallen you. I feel sure it will only 
be the prologue to a series of such scenes, 
each brighter and happier than the other. 
No, Arthur, I shall not live to see your 
richest rewards ; but I can imagine them, and 
the rest of my days will be the more peaceful 
for the prospect. Make a good use of your 
fortune, Arthur. If you ever become 
wealthy, do not let your wealth pervert you. 
It is a furnace through which few can pass 
unscathed ; but if youth holds forth any 
promise of manhood, I think you may be one 
of those. For my own part I am getting a 
little tired of life, though I hold with the old 
philosophers that no man should desert his 
post till Fate calls him from it. Life has not 



378 WOBKEES IN THE DAWN. 

been over kind to me, on the whole, though 
in the sight of your happiness, Arthur, in 
the hope of your future I find rich amends 
for all I have suffered. Still I am tired, and 
I am not sorry to feel that Fate is preparing 
the summons. I feel that any day I may- 
fall into my last sleep, and from that I hope 
and believe that no one will ever wake me." 
Arthur could not reply in words, for the 
solemn pathos of the old man's last words 
affected him too strongly. But he caught his 
friend's right hand in both his own, and 
pressed it fervently. Then, according to hid 
habit, he went upstairs into the printing 
office and worked an hour at case, till 
Mr. ToUady called him down to share his 
supper. Tt was eleven o'clock when they 
parted for the night, and for several hours 
after this Arthur paced his room, unable to 
go to rest. His forehead was hot and feverish 
with the ardent thoughts which wrought 
tumultuously in his mind. Now for the first 
time, in the dead stillness of the night, he 
seemed fully to realise the extent of his good 
fortune. He possessed for the future a yearly- 
income amply sufficient for all his moderate 
wants, if Mr. Tollady's sad forebodings should 
prove true, and he should find himself 
dependent on his own resources. A hundred 
and fifty pounds a year represent nearly 
three pounds a week, a fortune to one brought 
up among the hard- working classes of London 



THE STUDIO. 379 

life. How many have to live and support a 
family on not more than a third of that sum. 
And, in addition, all his thoughts arose before 
a backofround of calm deliorht, the conscious- 
ness that henceforth it would be possible to 
devote himself entirely to his art. Not for 
the present was his mind disturbed by those 
uneasy conflicts between the varying elements 
of his nature which we have already described. 
To-night he was all artist; the thought of 
living for anything but art never occurred 
to him during these hours of enraptured 
reverie. 

Strange that in the midst of his thoughts 
an old recollection should come back with 
startling vividness, and he should see himself 
as a child in Bloomford Rectory, sitting by 
the side of another child, a little girl, and 
gazing with delight at a large volume of 
pictures. Then he remembered what Mr. 
Gresham had said to him with regard to 
Helen Norman, and immediately his mind 
began to picture her as she must appear now 
that »he was grown up. He retained, of 
course, no rc'colfection of her face as a child, 
but ho had never ceased to associate with her 
memory a clisjtinct consciousness of wonder, 
partaking of reverence, from which he con- 
cluded that hIio had been, in all probability, a 
beautiful child. Should he ever see her at 
Mr. Gre»ham's? If he did, would she pay 
any attention to him, or show any sign of re- 



380 WOEKERS IN THE DAWN. 

membering his name ? There was but little 
chance of her doing so, and yet he felt he 
should very much like to see her, to know 
what she had become in the years since he bad 
sat by her side. Doubtless she was now a 
tall, handsome, proud young lady, whom the 
recollection of such an incident would cause 
to blush and be annoyed. 

As the clock at the Middlesex Hospital 
sounded two he put out his lamp and threw 
himself, still dressed, upon the bed. He 
never had felt more wakeful; sleep was alto- 
gether impossible for him. For half-an-hour 
he made vain endeavours to rest, and then 
once more rose and re-lit his lamp. Over his 
bed himg a small book-shelf, on which were 
ranged the few favourite books which he had 
been able to buy, and one of these he now 
took down and began to read. Tiring of this, 
he took u}) his drawing-board, and, having" 
jfixed the light in a suitable position, com- 
menced to work at a crayon copy of a cast 
which ho liad hung for the purpose against 
the wall. And at this he worked with 
desperate energy till at length the change in 
the position of the light and shade on his 
model told him that daylight was beginning 
to make its way into the room. Putting aside 
his work, he washed and made some altera- 
tions in liis dress, stole gently downstairs, 
and took a brisk walk till the hour for fetch- 
ing the newspapers arrived, when he opened 



THE STDDIO. 381 

the shop and made the preparations for the 
day's work in the usual way. 

For a couple of hours each morning after 
this, he worked in Mr. G-resharn's studio, and 
the greater part of the rest of the day he 
spent in studies which the former suggested, 
working with an energy begotten of the in- 
tense love he had for the work. Several 
hours, also, he continued to devote to Mr. 
ToUady's service, disregarding all the latter's 
remonstrances and his earnest entreaties that 
he would have more regard to his health. In 
the course of the following month he executed 
tn^o little water-colours, the fruit of two days 
spent in excursions to spots some miles up 
the Thames, and these being placed by Mr. 
Gresham's recommendation in the window of 
a picture shop in Oxford Street, were very 
shortly sold for prices which Arthur laughed 
at as extravagant. 

One morning Arthur had gone as usual to 
Portland Place, and, on being admitted, had 
ascended to the studio. It was Mr. Gres- 
ham's habit to enter the room some ten 
minutes after his pupil's arrival, so that the 
latter always opened the door and went in 
without the precaution of a knock. This 
morning, on doing so, he found that the 
studio was not empty. Standing before one 
of the large easels, examining a picture which 
was still incomplete, he saw a young lady, 
tall and graceful in figure, robed in u morn- 



k 



382 WORKEBS IN THE DAWN. 

ing-dress of dark material, which fitted tightly 
round her perfect shape, her hair gathered 
into a simple knot behind her head, around 
her neck a plain collar and a narrow violet 
coloured tie, which made a small bow in 
front, but with that exception devoid of 
ornaments. So easy, and yet so naturally 
dignified, was the attitude in which she stood^ 
so marvellous was the chaste beauty of her 
countenance, lighted up with a look of plea- 
sure as she gazed at the picture, so impres- 
sive was the extreme simplicity of her attire, 
that the first glance almost persuaded Arthur 
that he had before him the real person of one 
of the goddesses whose forms made beautiful 
his day-dreams and flitted in ghost-like 
silence across the vacancy of his sleep. So 
intensely was his artistic sense impressed by 
the beauty of the vision that he with diffi- 
culty suppressed an exclamation of delight 
which had risen to his lips. The next 
moment, the lady's clear, deep eye had turned 
upon him, and his sunk before its gaze. 

For a moment there was silence, during 
which both stood still. The lady was the first 
to speak. 

" Mr. Golding, is it not ? " she said ; and 
the voice thrilled upon every nerve in the 
hearers body, so wonderfully sweet did it 
sound to him. 

Arthur bowed, but could find no words. 

*' I had forgotten the time," pursued Helen 



THE STUDIO. 383 

Norman, " and must request you to pardon 
my intrusion. I knew that you came at ten, 
but the delight of looking at these pictures 
has kept me here too long." 

*' Pray do not let me disturb you. Miss 
Norman," said Arthur, venturing at length to 
raise his eyes. 

** You know who I am, then?" said Helen, 
speaking in the absolutely natural and un- 
affected manner which had always been 
characteristic of her, containing as little of 
self-consciousness as her beauty did of the 
commonplace. " I scarcely thought we should 
need a formal introduction." 

Arthur's heart swelled with a mingled pain 
and delight at the kind tones in which he 
heard himself addressed. The pain might be 
partly excess of pleasure, partly it was caused 
by the recollection of how very different his 
relations to this beautiful girl might have been 
had Fate suffered him to grow up at Bloom- 
ford Rectory. Almost in spite of himself an 
expression of these thoughts rose to his lips. 

" I should scarcely have thought you would 
have remembered my name, Miss Norman. 
My childish folly and ingratitude certainly 
rendered me unworthy of recollection." 

'' It is not my habit, Mr. Golding," replied 
Helen, *' to judge the motives of others. 
One's own are often scarcely to be under- 
stood. My father never ceased to speak of 

you." 



384 WOKKEES IN THE DAWN. 

" My thoughts have often turned in grati- 
tude to Mr. Norman," said Arthur, with 
sincerity in his voice. " It pains me that I 
was not able to see him again and express the 
feelings with which I remembered his kind- 
ness to me as a child." 

" My guardian speaks to me in high terms 
of your talent as an artist," said Helen; "I 
hope I may soon have the pleasure of seeing 
one of your pictures. But I am keeping you 
from your work. Good morning, Mr. Gold- 
mg. 

She bowed and passed out of the room ; 
and though by looking up to the ceiling of the 
room the summer sunshine could be seen 
playing athwart the blue vault of heaven, it 
seemed to Arthur as though she had left the 
room in darkness. 

" She is indeed a goddess ! " he exclaimed 
to himself, as, for the first time in his life, 
perhaps, he began with reluctance to work. 
" And she is as far superior to me as a 
' Madonna ' of Raphael is to this miserable 
smudge which I call a picture ! " 



END OF VOL. I. 



Printed by Remington & Co., 5, Arundel Street, Strand, W.C. 




^ 



-^ ^ 



