m 



lii 



. :J', 



wwm$ 







1*. '. . i 



wMltRffilt 






V,-'.'l' 





















mm 



m 






A»-h 



m 



W^ 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2010 with funding from 

University of Toronto 



http://www.archive.org/details/wormwooddramaofpOOcore 




Silvion Guid^l is dead aud it was I who killed him— with these hands alone." 

Page 8()4. Wormwood. 



WORMWOOD 



A DRAMA OF PARIS. 



By MARIE CORELLI, 

Author of ' A Romance of Two Worlds," *'T7ielma;' etc 



1-). A. L. BURT COMPANY, ^ ^ ^ ^ 
^ ^ ^ publishers! NEW YORK ■ 






V 



y-^ R A /^ ^p- 

S£P 1 4 1967 



S 



A MESSIEURS 
LES ABSINTHEURS DE PARIS, 

CES FANFARONS DU VICE 
QUI SONT 

LA HONTE ET LE DESESPOIR DE LEUR PATRIE. 



** And the name of the star is called WORM- 
WOOD : and the third part of the waters be- 
came Wormwood ; and many men died of the 
waters, because they were made bitter." — Rev- 
elation viii. 12 



" Et le nom de cette etoile etait ABSINTHE: 
et la troisibme partie des eaux fut changee en 
ABSINTHE ; et elies firent mourir un grand nom- 
bre d'hommes parce qu'elles ^taient devenues 
ambres." — R^v^lation viii. ii {Nouveau Testa- 
tnent Fran(ais)* 



SPECIAL PREFACE TO THE 

AUTHORIZED AMERICAN EDITION. 



As there are several unauthorized Editions of my works 
now circulating freely in the United States, it is but fair 
to the publishers of the present volume to state that this 
issue of " Wormwood ; A Drama of Paris," has been per- 
sonally revised and corrected for them by me, and is the 
Only Authorized version for America. Other novels of 
mine, notably " A Romance of Two Worlds," " Thelma," 
Vendetta ! " and " Ardath " are to be had in various 
forms at all prices throughout the States ; needless to say 
that these have been published without any reference to 
me as author, and, having been brought out in unseemly 
haste and carelessness, are full of the grossest errors and 
mistakes, for which I, naturally, cannot be responsible. 
That the " Romance of Two Worlds " for example, ap- 
peared in New York with a misleading picture-cover 
representing the Eastern and W^estern hemispheres, 
whereas the story itself concerns this world and the next, 
merely shows the zeal of the enterprising publisher who 
produced it at all risks without reading it ; — and that the 
American editions of " Vendetta ! " contain the maddest 
misprints in certain Italian idiomatic expressions, must 
not be set down to my charge as to one ignorant of the 
Italian language, but to the admirably " go-ahead " individ- 
uals in the book-trade who " rushed it through " for the 
American public. I have reason to love America for the 
sake of the many friends my writings have won for me 
there; friends whose faces I have never seen, but who 
correspond frequently with me and whom I seem famil- 

3 



4. SPECIAL PREFACE, 

iarly to know through the kindly written expression of 
their thoughts ; — and it is, I presume, not an unnatural 
desire on my part that such should, when reading my 
books, at least have the advantage of reading them as 
they were originally written. With regard to the present 
story, which I trust may help to rouse public attention to 
a pernicious Evil which is gradually spreading over all 
the European Continent, I beUeve most intelligent Ameri- 
cans who have visited Paris will read it with more or 
less anxious interest. It was, I think, a distinguished 
American Senator who quite recently wrote a long and 
exhaustive practical account of incalculable mischief 
wrought by the Poison-craze whose dire effects on one 
individual I have attempted to depict ; and if one or two 
more leaders among thinkers, physiologists and scientists 
would raise their voices to aid in denouncing this fatal 
brain-degradation and bringing it well before the con- 
sideration of those who are the heads of authority in 
France, it might be checked in its destructive progress, 
and, with a little earnest and decisive work, be stamped 
out altogether, as a disease is stamped out by perfect 
sanitation. In this hope I have written " Wormwood " ; 
in this spirit I trust it may be received, 

Marie Corelll 
London, October 24, 1890. 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 



The unhappy hero of the following drame is presented 
to English readers, not as an example of what is excep- 
tionally tragic and uncommon, but simply as a very ordi- 
nary type of a large and ever-increasing class. Men such 
as " Gaston Beauvais '* are to be met with every day in 
Paris, — and not only in Paris, but in every part of the 
Continent where the Curse, which forms the subject of 
this story, has any sort of sway. The morbidness of the 
modern French mind is well known and universally ad- 
mitted, even by the French themselves; the open athe- 
ism, heartlessness, flippancy, and flagrant immorality of 
the whole modern French school of thought is unques- 
tioned. If a crime of more than usual cold-blooded atro- 
city is committed, it generally dates from Paris, or near it ; 
— if a book or a picture is produced that is confessedly 
obscene, the author or artist is, in nine cases out of ten, 
discovered to be a Frenchman. The shop-windows and 
bookstalls of Paris are of themselves sufficient witnesses 
of the national taste in art and literature, — a national taste 
for vice and indecent vulgarity which cannot be too sin- 
cerely and compassionately deplored. There are, no 
doubt, many causes for the wretchedly low standard of 
moral responsibility and fine feeling displayed by the Paris- 
ians of to-day — but I do not hesitate to say that one of 
those causes is undoubtedly the reckless Absinthe-mania, 
which pervades all classes, rich and poor alike. Every 
one knows that in Paris the men have certain hours set 
apart for the indulgence of this fatal craze as religiously 
as Mussulmen have their hours for prayer, — and in a very 
short time the love of the hideous poison clings so closely 
to their blood and system that it becomes an absolute 

s 



6 INTRO D UC TOR Y NO TE.\ 

necessity of existence. The effects of its rapid working 
on the human brain are beyond all imagination horrible 
and incurable, and no romancist can exaggerate the ter- 
rific reality of the evil. If any of my readers are disposed 
to doubt the possibility of the incidents in my story or to 
think the details exaggerated, let such make due inquiries 
of any leading member of the French medical faculty as 
to the actual meaning of Absinthism, and the measured 
statement of the physician will seem wilder than the wild- 
est tragedy. Moreover, it is not as if this dreadful frenzy 
affected a few individuals merely, — it has crept into the 
brain of France as a nation, and there breeds perpetual 
mischief, — and from France it has spread, and is still 
spreading, over the entire Continent of Europe. It must 
also be remembered that in the many French cafes and 
restaurants which have recently sprung up in London, 
Absinthe is always to be obtained at its customary low 
price, — French habits, French fashions, French books, 
French pictures, are particularly favored by the English, 
and who can predict that French drug-drinking shall 
not also become i la mode in Britain ? — particularly at a 
period when our medical men are bound to admit that 
the love of Morphia is fast becoming almost a mania with 
hundreds of English women ! 

In the present story I have, as I say, selected a merely 
ordinary Parisian type ; there are of course infinitely 
Worse examples who have not even the shadow of a love- 
disappointment to excuse them for their self-indulgence. 
All I ask of my readers and critics is that they will kindly 
refrain from setting down my hero's opinions on men and 
things to me personally, as they were unwise enough to do 
in the case of a previous novel of mine entitled "Ven- 
detta ! " When an author depicts a character, he is not 
of necessity that character himself ; it would have been 
somewhat unfair to Balzac, for example, to have endowed 
him when a living man, with the extraordinary ideas and 
outrageous principles of his matchless artistic creation 
" Pere Goriot." I have nothing whatever to do with the 
wretched " Gaston Beauvais " beyond the portraiture of 
him in his own necessarily lurid colors; — while for the 
description of the low-class '''' bal masquk^' in Paris, I am 
in a great measure indebted to a very respectable-looking 
English tourist, who by his dress was evidently of some 



INTRO D UC TOR Y NO TE, y 

religious persuasion, and whom I overheard talking to a 
younger man, on board a steamer going from Thun to In- 
terlaken. It was evidently the worthy creature's first 
trip abroad, — he had visited the French capital, and he 
detailed to his friend, a very hilarious individual, certain 
of his most lively experiences there. I, sitting close by 
in a corner unobserved, listened with a good deal of sur- 
prise as well as amusement to his enthusiastic eulogy of 
the " caTi-ca?i '* as he had seen it danced in some peculiar 
haunt of questionable entertainment, and I took calm note 
thereof, for literary use hereafter. The most delicate feel- 
ings can hardly be ruffled by an honest (and pious) 
Britisher's raptures, — and as I have included these rapt- 
ures in my story, I beg to tender my thanks to the un- 
known individual who so unconsciously furnished me with 
a glowing description of what I have never seen and never 
wish to see ! 

For the rest, my " drama " is a true phase of the modern 
life of Paris ; one scene out of the countless tragedies that 
take place every day and everywhere in these our present 
times. There is no necessity to invent fables nowadays, 
— the fictionist need never torture his brain, for stories 
either of adventure or spectral horror. Life itself as it is 
lived among ourselves in all countries, is so amazing, 
swift, varied, wonderful, terrible, ghastly, beautiful, dread- 
ful, and, withal, so wildly inconsistent and changeful, that 
whosoever desires to write romances has only to closely 
and patiently observe men and women as they arc^ not as 
they seeniy — and then take pen in hand and write the — • 
Truth. 

MARIE CORELLI. 

Clarens, Lake Leman, SwrrzEiLLAND^ 
SeJ>tembert 1890. 



WORMWOOD, 



I. 

Silence, — silence ! It is the hour of the deepest hush 
of night ; the invisible intangible clouds of sleep brood 
over the brilliant city. Sleep ! What is it ? Forgetful- 
ness ? A sweet unconsciousness of dreamless rest. Aye ! 
it must be so, if I remember rightly ; but I cannot be 
quite sure, for it seems a century since I slept well. But 
what of that .'' Does any one sleep well nowadays, save 
children and hard-worked diggers of the soil .'' We who 
think — oh, the entanglements and perplexities of this 
perpetual Thought ! — we have no space or time wherein 
to slumber ; between the small hours of midnight and 
morning we rest on our pillows for mere form's sake, and 
doze and dream, — but we do not sleep. 

Stay ! let me consider. What am I doing here so late ? 
why am I not at home ? Why do I stand alone on this 
bridge, gazing down into the cold, sparkling water of the 
Seine — water that, to my mind, resembles a glittering 
glass screen, through which I see faces peering up at me, 
white and aghast with a frozen wonder ! How they 
stare, how they smile, all those drowned women and men ! 
Some are beautiful ; all are mournful. I am not sorry for 
them, no ! but I am sure they must have died with half 
their griefs unspoken, to look so wildly even in death. 
Is it my fancy, or do they want something of me ? I feel 
impelled towards them — they draw me downwards by a 
deadly fascination, I must go on, or else 

With a violent effort I tear myself away, and, leaving 
the bridge, I wander slowly homeward, 

SI 



12 WORMWOOD. 

The city sleeps, did I say ? Oh no ! Paris is not so 
clean of conscience or so pure of heart that its inhabit- 
ants should compose themselves to rest simply because 
it is midnight. There are hosts of people about and 
stirring ; rich aristocrats for instance, whose names are 
blazoned on the lists of honor and la haute noblesse^ can 
be met at every turn, stalking abroad like beasts in search 
of prey ; they are the painted and bedizened outcasts 
who draw their silken skirts scornfully aside from any 
chance of contact with the soiled and ragged garments 
worn by the wretched and starving members of the same 
deplorable sisterhood ; and every now and again the 
flashing of lamps in a passing carriage containing some 
redoubtable princess of the demi-monde, assures the 
beholder of the fact that, however soundly virtue may 
slumber, vice is awake and rampant. But what am I 
that I should talk of vice or virtue ? What business has 
a wreck cast on the shores of ruin to concern itself with 
the distant sailing of the gaudy ships bound for the same 
disastrous end ! 

How my brain reels ! The hot pavements scorch my 
tired feet, and the round white moon looks at me from the 
sky like the foolish ghost of herself in a dream. Street 
after street I pass, scarcely conscious of sight or sense ; 
I hardly know whither I am bound, and it is by mere 
mechanical instinct alone that I finally reach my desti- 
nation. 

Home at last ! I recognize the dim and dirty alley, 
the tumbledown, miserable lodging-house in which, of 
all the wretched rooms it holds, the wretchedest is the 
garret I call mine. That gaunt cat is always on the door- 
step, — always tearing some horrible offal she has found, 
with claws and teeth — yet savage as hunger has made her 
she is afraid of me, and bounds stealthily aside and away 
as I cross the threshold. Two men, my drunken landlord 
and his no less drunken brother, are quarrelling furiously 
in the passage; I shrink past them unobserved and make 
my way up the dark foul-smelling staircase to my narrow 
den, where, on entering, I jealously lock myself in, eager 
to be alone. Alone, alone — always alone 1 I approach 
the window and fling it wide open ; I rest my arms on the 
sill and look out drearily at the vast deep star-besprinkled 
heaven. 



WORMWOOD. 13 

They were cruel to me to-night at the cafe, particularly 
that young curly-haired student. Who is he, and wiiat is 
he ? I hate him, I know not why ! except that he reminds 
me of one who is dead. " Do not drink that," he said 
gravely, touching the glass I held. " It will drive you 
mad some day ! " Drive me mad ! Good, very good ! 
That is what a great many people have told me, — croakers 
all ! Who is mad, and who is sane "i It is not easy to 
decide. The world has various ways of defining insanity 
in different individuals. The genius who has grand ideas, 
and fancies he can realize them is "mad;" the priest 
who, like Saint Damien, sacrifices himself for others is 
" mad," tlie hero who, like the English Gordon, perishes 
at his post instead of running away to save his own skin, 
is " mad," and only the comfortable tradesman or finan- 
cier who amasses millions by systematically cheating his 
fellows, is " sane." Excellent ! Let me be mad, then, 
by all means • mad with the madness of Absinthe, the 
wildest, most luxurious madness in the world ! Vive la: 
folie! Vive r amour I Vii^e P a?ii7nalisin/ Vive le Diable f 
Live everybody, and everything that can live without a 
conscience, for conscience is at a discount in this age, and 
honesty cannot keep pace with our modern progress. The 
times are as we make them, and we have made ours those 
of realism ; the old idyllic days of faith and sentiment are 
past. 

Those cold and quiet stars ! What innumerable multi- 
tudes of them there are ! Why were they created ? 
Through countless centuries bewildered mankind has 
gazed at them and asked the same question, — a question 
never to be answered, — a problem never to be solved. 
The mind soon grows fatigued with pondering. It is 
better not to think. Yet one good thing has lately come 
out of the subtle and incessant workings of intellect, and 
that is that we need not trouble ourselves about God 
any more. Nothing in all the vast mechanism of the uni- 
verse can actually prove a Deity to be existent ; and no 
one is called upon to believe in what cannot be proved. 
I am glad of this, very glad ; for if I thought there were 
a God in heaven — a Supreme Justice enthroned in some 
far-off sphere of life unseen yet eternal, I think — I do not 
know, but I think — I should be afraid ! Afraid of the 
day, afraid of the night, afraid of the glassy river, with its 



14 WORMWOOD. 

thousands of drowned eyes below ; afraid, perchance, of 
my own hovering shadow ; and still more darkly dimly 
afraid of creatures that might await me in lands invisible 
beyond the grave — phantom creatures that I have 
wronged as much and haply more than they in their time 
wronged me ! 

Yet, after all, I am no coward ; and why should I fear 
God, supposing a God should, notwithstanding our denial 
of Him, positively exist ? If He is the Author of Crea- 
tion, He is answerable for every atom within it, even for 
me. I have done evil. What then ? Am I the only 
one ? If I have sinned more, I have also suffered more • 
and plenty of scientists and physiologists could be found 
to prove that my faults are those of temperament and 
brain-construction, and that I cannot help them if I would. 
Ah, how consoling are these advanced doctrines ! No 
criminal ought, in strict justice, to be punished at all, see- 
ing that it is his inborn nature to commit crime, and that 
he cannot alter that nature even if he tried ! Only a cant- 
ing priest would dare to ask him to try ,• and, in France 
at least, we have done with priestcraft. 

Well, we live in a great and wonderful era, and we have 
great and wonderful needs — needs which must be supplied I 
One of our chief requirements is that we should know every- 
thing — even things that used for honor and decency's sake 
to be concealed. Wise and pure and beautiful things we 
have had enough of. They belong to the old classic days 
of Greece and Rome, the ages of idyll and allegory; and 
we find them on the whole rather ennuyant. We have 
developed different tastes. We want the ugly truths of 
life, not the pretty fables. We like ugly truths. We find 
them piquant and palatable, like the hot sauce poured 
on fish to give it a flavor. For example, the story of 
" Paul et Virginie" is very charming, but also very tame 
and foolish. It suited the literary spirit of the time in 
which it was written , but to us in the present day there 
is something far more entrdiiiant in a novel which faith- 
fully describes the love-making of Jeanne the washer-wo- 
man with Jacques the rag-picker. We prefer their coarse 
amours to Virginie's tearful sentiment — autrestemps^ autres 
mozurs. I thought of this yesterday, when, strolling aim- 
lessly across the Pont Neuf, I glanced at the various titles 
of the books for sale on the open air counters and saw 



WORAflVOOD. 15 

Realism represented to the last dregs of reality. And then 
I began to consider what the story of jny life would look 
like when written, and what people would think of it if 
they read it. This idea has haunted me all last night and 
to-day. I have turned it over and over again in my mind 
with a certain savage amusement. Dear old world ! dear 
Society ! will you believe me if I tell you what I am ? No, 
I am sure you will not ! You will shudder a little, per- 
haps ; but it is far more likely that you will scoff and 
sneer. It is so easy to make light of a fellow-creature's 
downfall. Moreover your critics will assure you that the 
whole narrative is a tissue of absurd improbabilities, that 
such and such events never could and never would hap- 
pen under any sort of circumstances whatever, and that a 
disordered imagination alone has to do with the weaving 
of a drama as wild as mine ! 

But, think what you will, say what you choose, I am re- 
solved you shall know me. It is well you should learn 
what manner of man is in your midst ; a man as pitiless 
as pestilence, as fierce as flame ; one dangerous to himself 
and still more dangerous to the community at large ; and 
yet — remember this, I pray you ! — a man who is, after all, 
only one example out of a thousand ; a thousand .'' ay, 
more than a thousand like him, who in this very city are 
possessed by the same seductive delirium, and are press- 
ing on swiftly to the same predestined end ! 

However, my concern is not with others, but solely with 
myself. I care little for the fact that perhaps nearly half 
the population of France is with me in my frenzy : what 
is France to me or I to France 7iow ? Time was when I 
loved my country ; when I would have shed every drop of 
blood in my body gladly for her defence ; but now — now, 
— enjin / I see the folly of patriotism, and to speak 
frankly, I would rather drown like a dog in the Seine than 
undergo the troublesome fatigues of war. I was not al- 
ways so indifferent, I confess ; I came to it by degrees as 
others have done, and as others are doing who live as I 
live. I tell you there are hundreds of men in Paris to-day 
who are quite as apathetic on the subject of national 
honor or disgrace as I am, — who, thanks to the pale-green 
draught we drain as in our cafes night after night with una- 
bated zest and never-satiated craving, have nigh forgotten 
their country's bitter defeat, — or if they have not f orggtten, 



l6 WORMWOOD, 

have certainly ceased to care. True, they talk, — we all 
talk, — of taking the Rhine and storming BerUn, just as 
children babble of their toy castles and tin soldiers, but 
we are not in earnest. No, no ! not we ! We are wise in 
our generation we absintheurs ; life is so worthless that 
we grudge making any sort ol exertion to prolong it, and 
it is probable that if the enemy were at our very doors we 
should scarcely stir a finger to repel attack. Do the Ger- 
mans know this I wonder ? Very likely ! and, knov/ing it, 
bide their time! But let them com.e. Why not? One 
authority is as good as another, to me, at any rate, — for I 
have no prejudices and no principles. The whole wide 
earth is the same to me, — a mere grave to bury nations in. 

Well ! I have done many strange things in my day, and 
what I choose to do now is perhaps the strangest of all — 
to write the history of my life and thought ; to strip my 
soul naked, as it were, to the wind of the world's con- 
tempt. World's contempt ! A bagatelle ! the world can 
have no more contempt for me, than I have contempt for 
the world ! 

Dear people of Paris, you want Realism, do you not .^ 
Realism in art, realism in literature, realism in everything.-^ 
You Frenchmen and Frenchwomen, dancing on the edge 
of your own sepulchre — for th*^ time L coming fast when 
France will no more be accounted a nation — you want to 
look at the loathsome worms and unsightly poisonous 
growths that attend your own decomposition and decay ? 
You want life denuded of all poetical adornment that you 
may see it as it truly is ? Well, so you shall, as far as I 
am concerned ! I will hide nothing from you ! I will 
tear out the very fibres of my being and lay them on your 
modern dissecting-table ; nay, I will even assist you in 
the probing-work of the mental scalpel. Like you I hate 
all mysticism and sublime ideal things ; we need them as 
little or as much as we need God. 

Perhaps it is not often that you chance upon a human 
subject who is entirely callous ? A creature in whose 
nerves you can thrust your steel hooks of inquisitorian 
research without his uttering so much as a smothered sob 
of pain ? a being hard as flint, impressionless as adamant, 
and totally impervious to past, present, or future misery ? 
Yet I am such an one ! perchance you may find me a 
strange, even an interesting study ! 



WORAfWOOD. 



'3r 



Consider me well ! — my heart has turned to stone, my 
brain to fire ; I am conscious of no emotion whatever, 
save an all-devouring dreadful cuiiosity — curiosity to 
know dark things forbidden to all but madmen, — things 
that society, afraid of its own wickedness, hastily covers 
up and hides from the light of day, feebly pretending 
they have no existence ; things that make weak souls 
shudder and cry and wrestle with their mythical God in 
useless prayer, — these are the things I love ; the things I 
drag out from the obscure corners and murky recesses of 
life, and examine and gloat upon, till I have learnt from 
them all they can teach me. But I never know enough ; 
search as I may into the minutest details of our complex 
being, there is always something that escapes me, some 
link that I lose, some clue that I fancy might explain 
much that seems incomprehensible. I suppose others 
have missed this little unnameable something also, and 
that may be the reason why they have found it necessary 
to invent a God. But enough ! I am here to confess 
myself, not as a conscience-stricken penitent confesses to 
a priest, but as a man may confess himself to his fellow- 
men^ Let human nature judge me! I am too proud to 
mak^ appeal to an unproven Divinity. Already I have 
passed judgment on myself : — what can you say for, or 
against me, O world, that will alter or strengthen my own 
self-vvTought condemnation and doom ? I have lived fast, 
what then ? Is it not the way to die quickly ? 



iS WORMWOOD. 



n. 

It is a familiar business to me, this taking up of the 
pen and writing down of thought. Long ago, when I was 
quite a young man, I used to scxihhlQ feuilletons and stray 
articles for the Paris papers and gain a few extra francs 
thereby. Once, too, I wrote a novel — very high-flown in 
style and full of romantic sentiment. It was about a girl 
all innocence and a man all nobleness, who were inter- 
rupted in the progress of their amours by the usual sort 
of villain so useful to the authors of melodrama. I saw 
the book for sale at a stall near the Palais Royale the 
other day, and should probably have bought it for mere 
idle curiosity's sake, but that it cost two francs and I 
could not spare the money. I stood and looked at it in- 
stead, thinking how droll it was that I should ever have 
written it ! And, little by little, I began to remember 
what I had been like at that time — the portrait of myself 
emerged out of the nebulous gray mist that always more 
or less obscures my vision, and I saw my face as it had 
appeared in youth — clear-complexioned, dark-eyed, and 
smiling — such a face as may be seen more frequently 
in Provence or Southern Italy than in the streets 
of Paris ; a face that many were complaisant enough to 
call handsome, and that assuredly by none would have 
been deemed positively ill-looking. There was a prom- 
ising intelligence I believe in my physiognomy, a certain 
deceptive earnestness and animation that led my over- 
sanguine relatives and friends to expect wonders of me — 
a few enthusiasts expressing their firm (and foolish) con- 
viction that I should be a great man some day. Great ! 
I ? I laugh to think of it. I can see my own features as 
I write, in a cracked and blurred mirror opposite; I 
note the dim and sunken eyes, the discolored skin, the 
disheveled hair — a villainous reflection truly \ I might 
be sixty from my looks — yet I am barely forty. Hard 



WORMWOOD. 19 

livings? Well no — not what the practiced f^ouleifardier 
would understand by that term. I do not frequent 
places of amusement, I am not the boon-companion of 
ballet-dancers and cafc-c/uiu tenses ; I am too poor for that 
sort of revelry, inasmuch as I can seldom afford to dine. 
Yet I might have been rich, I might have been respect- 
able, I might even have been famous — imagine it ! for I 
know I once had a few glimmerings of the swift lightning 
called genius in me, and that my thoughts were not pre- 
cisely like those of everyday men and women. But 
chance was against me, chance or fate ; both terms are 
synonymous. Let none talk to me of opposing one's self 
to fate ; that is simply impossible. Fight as we may we 
cannot alter an evil destiny, or reverse a lucky one. 

Resist temptation ! cry the preachers. Very good ! but 
suppose you can7iot resist ? Suppose you see no object 
whatever in making resistance t For example, point out 
to me if you can, what use it would be to any one living 
that I should reform my ways ? Not a soul would care ! 
I should starve on just as I starve now, only without any 
sort of comfort ; I should seek help, work, sympathy, and 
find none ; and I should perish in the end just as surely 
and as friendlessly as I shall perish now. We know how 
the honest poor are treated in this best of worlds — pushed 
to the wall and trampled upon to make room for the 
rich to ride by. We also know what the much-prated-of 
rewards of virtue are ; the grudging thanks and reluctant 
praise of a few obscure individuals who make haste to 
forget you as soon as you are dead ; think you that such 
reward is worth the trouble of winning ? In the present 
advanced condition of things it is '■eally all one whether 
we are virtuous or vicious, for who cares very much about 
morality in this age ? Morality has always seemed to me 
such an ambiguous term. I asked my father to define 
it once, and he answered me thus — 

" Morality is a full and sensible recognition of the re- 
sponsibilities of one's being, and a steadfast obedience 
to the laws of God and one's country." 

Exactly ! but how does this definition work, when by 
the merest chance you discover that you have no actual 
responsibilities, and that it does not matter in the least 
what becomes of you ? Again, that the laws of God and 
country are drawn up, after much violent dispute and 



20 WORMWOOD. 

petty wrangling, by a few human individuals nearly, if 
not quite, as capricious and unreasonable as yourself ? 
What of morality, then ? Does it not resolve itself into a 
myth, like the Creed the churches live by ? 

A truce, I say, to such fair-seeming hypocritical shows 
of good, in a world which is evil to its very core ! Let us 
know ourselves truly for what we are, let us not deceive 
our minds with phantasms of what we cannot be. We 
are mere animals — we shall never be angels — neither 
here nor hereafter. As for me, I have done with ro- 
mances ; love, friendship, ambition, fame ; in past days 
it is true I set some store by these airy cheats — these 
vaporous visions ; but now — now they count to me as 
naught ; I possess a dearer joy, more real, more lastmg 
than they all ! 

Would you learn what thing it is that holds me, 
wretched as I seem, to life "i what link binds my frail 
body and frailer soul together ? and why, with no friends 
and no fortune, I still contrive to beat back death as 
long as possible } Would you know the single craving of 
my blood — the craving that burns in me more fiercely 
than hunger in a starving beast of prey — the one desire, 
to gratify which, I would desperately dare and defy all 
men ? Listen, then ! A nectar, bitter-sweet — like the 
last kiss on the lips of a discarded mistress — is the secret 
charm of my existence ; green as the moon's light on a 
forest pool it glimmers in my glass ; eagerly I quaff it, 
and, as I drink, I dream. Not of foolish things. No ! 
Not of dull saints and smooth landscapes in heaven and 
wearisome prudish maids ; but of glittering bacchantes, 
nude nymphs in a dance of hell, flashing torrents and 
dazzling mountain-peaks, of storm and terror, of lightning 
and rain, of horses galloping, of flags flying, of armies 
marching, of haste and uproar and confusion and death ! 
Ay ! even at times I have heard the trumpets blare on 
the field of battle, and the shout "Z^ revanche I la re- 
vanche P^ echoing wildly in my ears, and I have waded 
deep in the blood of our enemies, and wrested back from 
their grasp Alsace-Lorraine ! . . . 

Ah, fool that I am ! What ! raving again ? I torture 
myself with absurd delusions ; did I not but lately say I 
loved France no longer ? . . . France ! Do I not love 
thee ? Not now,— oh, not now let ray words be accepted 



WOJ^MWOOD. 2\ 

concerning thee ; not now, but later on, when this heavy 
weight is lifted from my heart ; when this hot pulsation 
is stilled in my brain ; when the bonds of living are cut 
asunder and 1 wander released, a shadow among shades ; 
then, it may be, I shall find tears to shed, tears of passion- 
ate tenderness and wild remorse above thy grave, poor 
France, tliou beaten and discrowned fair empress of 
nations ; thou w hom I, and others such as I am, might 
yet help to rescue and reinvest with glory if — if only we 
could be roused — roused to swift action in time, before it 
is too late I . . . 

There ! the agony is over, and I am calm once more, 
I do not often yield to my own fancies ; I know their 
power, how they drag at me, and strive to seize and pos- 
sess me with regrets for the past ; but they shall not suc- 
ceed. No wise man stops to consider his by-gone possi- 
bilities. The land of Might-Have-Been is, after all, noth- 
ing but a blurred prospect, a sort of dim and distant land- 
scape, where the dull clouds rain perpetual tears ! 

Of course the beginning of ray history is — love. It is 
the beginning of every man and every woman's history, 
if they are only frank enough to admit it. Before that 
period, life is a mere series of smooth and small events, 
monotonously agreeable or disagreeable, according to our 
surroundings ; a time in which we learn a few useful 
things and a great many useless ones, and are for the 
most part in a half-awakened pleasing state of uncertainty 
and wonder about the world in general. Love lights upon 
us suddenly like a flame, and lo ! we are transformed, we 
are for the first time alive, and conscious of our beating 
pulses, our warm and hurrying blood ; we feel, we know ; 
we gain a wisdom wider and sweeter than any to be found 
in books, and we climb step by step up the height of 
ecstasy, till we stand in so lofty an attitude that we seem 
to ourselves to dominate both earth and heaven ! It is 
only a fool's paradise we stumble into, after all, but then, 
ever}'thing is more or less foolish in this w^orld ; if we wish 
to avoid folly we must seek a different planet. 

Let me think; where did I see her first? At her 
mother's house, it must have been. Yes ! the picture 
floats back to me across a hazy sea of memories, and sus- 
pends itself, mirage-like, before my half-bewildered gaze. 
She has just returned to Paris from her school at Lau« 



22 iVORMWOOD, 

sanne in Switzerland. The Swiss wild-roses had left their 
delicate hues on her cheeks, the Alpine blue gentians had 
lost their little hearts in her eyes. She was dressed that 
night in quaint empire fashion — a simple garb of purest 
white silk, with a broad sash drawn closely under the 
bosom — her rich curls of dark brown hair were caught up 
in high masses and tied with a golden ribbon. A small 
party was being held in honor of her home-coming. Her 
father, the Comte de Charmilles, a stern old royalist 
whose allegiance to the Orleans family was only equalled 
by his fanatical devotion to the Church, led her through 
the rooms leaning gracefully on his arm, and formally in- 
troduced her, in his stately old-fashioned way, to all the 
guests assembled. I was among the last of these, yet not 
the least, for my father and the Comte had been friends 
from boyhood, and there was an especially marked kind- 
ness in his voice and manner, when, pausing at my side, 
he thus addressed me — 

" Monsieur Beauvais, permit me to present to you my 
daughter Pauline. Pauline, my child, this is M. Gaston 
Beauvais, the son of our excellent friend M. Charles Beau- 
vais, the banker, who has the beautiful house at Neuilly, 
and who used to give thee so many marrons glaces when 
thou wert a small, dear, greedy baby ; dost thouremember ? " 

A charming smile parted her lovely lips, and she re- 
turned my profound bow with the prettiest sweeping curt- 
sey imaginable. 

" Helas I " she said playfully, shrugging her shoulders. 
** I must confess that the days of the marrons glaces are 
not yet past ! I am a greedy baby still, am I not, my good 
papa? Can you believe it, Monsieur Beauvais, those 
marrons glaces were the first luxuries I asked for when I 
came home ! they are so good ! everything is so good in 
Paris ! My dear, beautiful Paris ! I am so glad to be 
back again ! You cannot imagine how dull it is at Lau- 
sanne ! A pretty place ? Oh yes ! but so very dull ! 
There are no good bon-bons^ no del ices of any kind, and 
the people are so stupid they do not even know how to 
make an eclair properly ! ah. How I used to long 
for eclairs! I saw some one afternoon in a little 
shop-window, and went in to try what they were like ; mon 
Dieu ! they were so very bad, they tasted of cheese ! 
Yes, truly ! so many things in Switzerland taste of cheese. 



IVORMIVOOD- 13 

I think ! Par exempJi\ \vx\q. you ever been to Vevey ? 
No ? ah ! when you do go there, you will taste cheese in 
the very air ! " 

She laughed, and heaved a comical little sigh over the 
one serious inconvenience and unforgettable disadvantage 
of her past school-life, namely, the lack of delectable 
kclairs and viarrofis ghich, while I, who had been absorbed 
in a fascinated study of her eyes, her hair, her pretty 
figure, her small hand that every now and then waved a 
white fan to and fro with a lazy grace that reminded me 
of the flashing of a sea-bird's pinion, thought to myself 
what a mere child she was for all the dignity of her eight- 
een years ; a child as innocent and fresh as a flower just 
bursting into bloom, with no knowledge of the world into 
which she was entering, and with certainly no idea of the 
power of her own beauty to rouse the passions of man. I 
listened to her soft and trifling chatter with far deeper 
interest than I should probably have felt in the conver- 
sation of the most astute diplomat or learned philosopher, 
and as soon as I saw my opportunity I made haste to 
offer her my arm, first, however, as in duty bound, glanc- 
ing expressively at her father for permission to do so — 
permission which he instantly and smilingly accorded. 
Old fool ! why did he throw us together ? why did he not 
place obstacles in the way of our intercourse ? Because, 
royalist and devotee as he was, he understood the prac- 
tical side of life as well, if not better than any shrewd 
republican going : — he knew that my father was rich, and 
that I was his only heir, and he laid his plans accordingly. 
He was like all French fathers ; yet why should I specify 
French fathers so particularly ? English fathers are the 
same ; all fathers of all nations nowadays look to the 
practical-utility advantages of marriage for their children 
— and quite right too ! One cannot live on air-bubbles of 
sentiment. 

Pauline de Charmilles was not a shy girl, but by this I 
do not mean it to be in the least imagined that she was 
bold. On the contrary, she had merely that quick bright- 
ness and esprit which is the happy heritage of so many 
Frenchwomen, none of whom think it necessary to 
practise or assume the chilly touch-me-not diffidence and 
unbecoming constraint which makes the young English 
**mees'* such a tame and tiresome companion to men of 



a 4 tvoj^Mwoon. 

sense and humor. She was soon perfectly at her ease 
with me, and became prettily garrulous and confidential, 
telling me stories of her life at Lausanne, describing the 
loveliness of the scenery on Lake Leman, and drawing 
word portraits of her teachers and schoolmates, with a 
facile directness and point that brought them at once be- 
fore the mind's eye as though they were actually present. 
We rat together for some time on a window-seat from 
which we could command a charming little glimpse of the 
Bois de Boulogne, for M. de Charmilles would not live 
far away from this, his favorite promenade in all weathers, 
and talked of many things, particularly of life in Paris, 
and the gayeties that were foretold for the approaching 
winter season. Reunions, balls, receptions, operas, 
theatres, all such festivities as these, this ingenuous wor- 
shipper of the " marron glace " looked forward to with 
singular vivacity, and it was only after she had babbled 
sweetly about fashion and society for several minutes that 
she suddenly turned upon me with a marvellously brilliant 
penetrating glance of her dark blue eyes, a glance such as 
I afterwards found out was common to her, but which 
then startled me as much as an unexpected flash of light- 
ning might have done, and said — 

" And you ? What zxq you going to do ? How do you 
amuse yourself?" 

" Mademoiselle, I work ! " 

" Ah yes ! You are in your father's business." 

** I am his partner." 

"You have difficult things to think about? You labor 
ail the day ? " 

I laughed — she looked so charmingly compassionate. 

" No, not all the day, but for several hours of it. We 
are bankers, you know, and the taking charge of other 
people's money, mademoiselle, is a very serious business ! " 

" Oh, that I can quite imagine ! But you must rest 
sometimes, — you must visit your friends and be gay — is 
it not so ? " 

"Assuredly. But perhaps I do not take my rest 
precisely like other people, — I read a great deal, and I 
"write also, occasionally." 

" Books ? " she exclaimed, her lovely eyes opening wide 
with eager interest. *' You write books ? " 

** I have written one or two," I admitted modestly. 



IVORAfWOOD. 9j 

"Oh, do tell me the titles of them ! " she entreated. ** I 
shall be so interested ! 1 read every story I can get hold 
of, especially love-stories, you know ! I adore love- 
stories 1 I always cry over them, and " 

Here our conversation was abruptly broken off. 
Madame la Comtesse de Charmilles, a dignified grande 
dame clad in richest black silk, with diamonds gleaming 
here and there upon her handsome person, sailed up to 
us from a remote corner of the room where she had no 
doubt been watching us with the speculative observation 
of the match-making matron, and said — 

" Pauline, my child, the Marquis de Guiscard desires 
the honor of taking you in to supper. Monsieur Beauvais 
will have the amiability to escort your cousin. My niece, 
Mademoiselle St. Cvr — Monsieur Gaston Beauvais." 
And thereupon she presented me to a pale serious-look«» 
ing girl, who merely acknowledged my formal salute by 
the slightest perceptible bend of her head, and whom I 
scarcely glanced at, so great was my chagrin to see the 
fascinating Pauline carried off on the arm of De Guiscard, 
a battered beau of sixty, grizzled as a bear, and wrinkled 
as old parchment. I suppose my vexation was distinctly 
visible in my face, for Madame de Charmilles smiled a 
little as she saw me march stiffly past her into the supper- 
room, without condescending to say a word to my pale 
partner, whom I considered at the moment positively ugly. 
To my comfort, however, I found Pauline seated next to 
me at table, and I made amends for my previous disap- 
pointment by conversing with her all the time, to the 
complete vanquishment and discomfiture of old De 
Guiscard. Not that he really cared, I think, seeing he 
was so entirely absorbed in eating. We talked of books 
and pictures. I sought and obtained the permission to 
send her two of my own literary productions, the two 
which I myself judged as my best efforts; one a critical 
study of Alfred de Musset, the other the high-flown senti- 
mental novel before mentioned, which at that time had 
only just been published. I spoke to her of the great 
geniuses reigning in the musical world — of the unrivalled 
Sarasate, of Rubinstein, of Verdi,' of the child-pianist, 
Otto Hegner ; then, skimming down from the empyrean 
of music to the lower level of the histrionic art, I de- 
scribed to her the various qualities of talent displayed b/ 



26 WOI^MWOOD. 

the several actors and actresses who were ranked among 
the most popular of the passing hour. And so we chatted 
on, happily engrossed with one another, and forgetful of 
all else. As for the pale cousin, whose name I afterwards 
learned was Heloise, I never gave her a second thought. 
She sat on the other side of me, and that was all I knew 

of her then ; but afterwards ! No matter ! she is dead, 

quite dead, and I only dream I see her still ! 

The hours fled by on golden wings, and before that 
evening ended — before I pressed her two small white 
hands in my own at parting, I felt that I loved Pauline de 
Charmilles — loved her as I should never love any other 
woman. An overwhelming passion seized me ; I was no 
longer master of my own destiny ; Pauline was my fate. 
What was her fascination ? How was it that she, a girl 
fresh from school, a mere baby in thought, fond of bon- 
bons and foolish trifles, should suddenly ravish my soul 
by surprise and enslave and dominate it utterly ? I can- 
not tell ; put the question to the physiologists and scien- 
tists who explain everything, and they will answer you. 
She was beautiful — ^that I can positively affirm, for I have 
studied every detail of her loveliness as few could have 
done. And I suppose her beauty allured me. Men 
never fall in love at first with a woman's mind ; only with 
her body. They may learn to admire the mind after- 
wards, if it prove worth admiration, but it is always a 
secondary thing. This may be called a rough truth, but 
it is true for all that. Who marries a woman of intellect 
by choice t No one, and if some unhappy man does it 
by accident, he generally regrets it. A stupid beauty is 
the most comfortable sort of housekeeper going, believe 
me — she will be strict with the children, scold the serv- 
ants, and make herself look as ornamental as she can 
till age and fat render ornament superfluous. But a 
woman of genius, with that strange subtle attraction 
about her which is yet not actual beauty, she is the per- 
son to be avoided if you would have peace ; if you 
would escape reproach ; if you would elude the fixed and 
melancholy watchfulness of a pair of eyes haunting you 
in the night ! Eyes such I see always — always, and shud- 
deringly wonder at ! — eyes full of unshed tears — will those 
tears never fall ? — large, soft, serious eyes, like those of 
Pauline's pale cousin Hdliose I 



WOUMWOOD. , J7 



III. 

I MAY as well speak of this woman H^loi'se St. Cyr, 
before I go on any further. I say this woman ; I could 
never call her a girl, though she was young enough — only 
twenty. But she was so pale and quiet, and so concen- 
trated within the mystic circle of her own thoughts, that 
she never seemed to me like others of her sex and age. 
At first I took a strong dislike to her, she had such fair 
bright hair, and I hated golden-haired women. I sup- 
pose this was because writers — poets especially — have 
sung their praises of golden hair till the world is wearied, 
— and also because so many females of the demi-monde 
have dyed their coarse tresses to such hideous straw- 
tints in order to be in accordance with the prevailing 
fashion and sentiment. However, the abundant locks of 
He'loise were, in their way, of a matchless hue, a singularly 
pale gold, brightening here and there into flecks of red- 
dish auburn close to the smooth nape of her neck, where 
they grew in soft, small curls like the delicate fluff under 
a young bird's wing. I often caught myself staring at 
these little warm rings of sun-color on the milky white- 
ness of her skin, when she sat in a window-corner apart 
from myself and Pauline, reading some great volume of 
history or poetry, entirely absorbed, and apparently uh- 
conscious of our presence. Her uncle told me she was a 
wonderful scholar, that she had numberless romances in 
her head, and all the poets in her heart. I remember I 
thought at the time that he was exaggerating her gifts out 
of mere affectionate complaisa7ice, for I never quite be- 
lieved in woman's real aptitude for learning. I could 
quite understand a certain surface-brilliancy of attain- 
ment in the female mind, but I would never admit that 
such knowledge went deep enough to last. I was mis- 
taken, of course ; since then I have realized that a 
woman' s genius, if great and true, equals, and often sur* 



ag. WORMWOOD. 

passes, that of the most gifted man. I used, however, to 
look upon Heloise St. Cyr with a certain condescension, 
only allowing her, in my opinion, to be about one degree 
in advance beyond the ordinary feminine intelligence. I 
had, as I said, a vague dislike to her, which was not 
lessened when, after reading my novel — the novel I was 
so proud of having written — she smiled at the woes of my 
sentimental heroine, and told me very gently that I did 
not yet understand women. Not understand women ! 
I, a born and bred Parisian of five-and-twenty ! Absurd ! 
Now Pauline " adored " my book. She read and re-read 
it many times, and I gave her much more credit for good 
taste in literature, than the pale woman student who was 
forever mooning over Homer and Plato. I could not 
understand Pauline's almost passionate reverence for this 
quiet, sad-eyed cousin of hers — never were two creatures 
more utterly opposed to each other in character and sen- 
timent. But, strange to say, love for Heloise seemed the 
one really serious part of Pauline's nature, while Heloise's 
affection for her, though not so openly displayed, was 
evidently strong and deeply-rooted. Mademoiselle St. 
Cyr was poor, so I understood ; her parents resided in 
some obscure town in Normandy, and had hard work to 
keep a decent roof above their heads, for which reason 
the Comtesse de Charmilles had undertaken the care of 
this eldest girl of her brother's family, promising to do 
her best for her, and, if possible, to marry her well. But 
Hdloise showed no inclination for marriage ; she was dull 
and distraite in the company of men, and seemed bored 
by their conversation rather than pleased. Nevertheless, 
she possessed her own fascination ; what it was I never 
could see, — not the7i — a fascination sufficient to win the 
devoted attachment of both her aunt and uncle, to whom 
she became a positive necessity in the household. I soon 
found out that nothing was done without He'loise being 
first consulted, — that in any domestic difficulty or cotitre- 
temps^ everybody washed their hands of trouble and trans- 
ferred it to Heloise ; that when her uncle, to gratify his 
extreme love of fresh air and exercise, cantered into the 
Bois every morning at six o'clock, she rode with him on a 
spirited mf^re that the very groom was afraid of ; that she 
put the finishing touches to her aunt's toilet and tied 
the last Uttle decorative knot of ribbon in Pauline's 



IVORMIVOOD. 39 

luxuriant hair, and that she was generally useful to every 
one. This fact of itself made nie consider her wilh a sort 
of faint contempt ; practical-utility persons were never at- 
tractive to me, though I reluctantly owned the advisability 
of their existence. And then 1 never half believed what I 
heard about her ; her talents and virtues seemed to me to 
be always overrated. / never saw her occupied other- 
wise than with a book. She was forever reading, — she 
was, I decided, going to develop herself intoa"femme 
savante, " a character I detested. So I paid her very 
little attention, and when I did speak to her on any sub- 
ject it was always with that particularly condescending 
carelessness which a wise man of five-and-twenty who has 
written books may bestow on a vastly inferior type of 
humanity. 

In a very short time I became a frequent and inti- 
mate visitor at the house of the De Charmilles, and 
my intentions there were pretty well guessed by all 
the members of the family. Nothing to the purport 
of marriage, however, had yet been said. I had not 
even dared to whisper to Pauline my growing love for 
her. I was aware of her father's old-fashioned sentiments 
on etiquette, and knew that, in strict accordance with what 
he deemed honor, I was bound, before paying any serious 
addresses to his daughter, to go through the formality 
of askmg his permission. But I was in no hurry to do 
this ; it was a sufficient delight to me for the present to see 
my heart's enchantress occasionally, to bring her flowers 
or bon-bons, to hear her sing and play — for she was a 
graceful proficient in music — and to make one of the fam- 
ily party at supper, and argue politics good-humoredly with 
the old Royalist Count, whose contempt for the Republic 
was beyond all bounds, and who was anxious to convert 
me to his way of thinking. Often on these occasions my 
father, an excellent man, though apt to be rather prosy 
when he yielded to his weakness for telling anecdotes, 
would join us, brinG^ing with him one of his special friends 
the little fat Cure of our parish, whose bon-mots were pro- 
verbial ; and many a pheasant evening we passed all to- 
gether, seated round the large table in the oak-panelled 
dining-room, from whose walls the stiffly painted portraits 
of the ancestral De Charmilles seemed to frown or smile 
Mpon us, according to the way in which the lamp-light 



30 



WORMWOOD. 



flickered or fell. And as the days flew on and November 
began to rustle by in a shroud of dead autumn leaves, it 
seemed to my adoring eyes that Pauline grew lovelier than 
ever. Her gayety increased ; she invested herself with a 
thousand new fascinations, a thousand fresh coquetries. 
Every dress she wore appeared to become her more per- 
fectly than the last. She fluttered here and there like a 
beautiful butterfly in a garden of roses, and I, who had 
loved her half-timidly before, now grew mad for her ! mad 
with a passion of longing that I could hardly restrain — a 
passion that consumed me hotly like a fever and would 
scarcely let me sleep. Whenever I fell, out of the sheer 
exhaustion of my thoughts, into a restless slumber, I saw 
her in my dreams — a flitting, dancing sylph on rainbow- 
colored clouds — her voice rang in my ears, her arms 
would wave and beckon me ; — " Pauline ! Pauline ! " I 
would cry aloud, and, starting from my pillow, I would 
rise and pace my room to and fro, to and fro, like a chaf- 
ing prisoner in a cell till morning dawned. During all 
this self-torment which I half enjoyed, it being a more de- 
licious than painful experience, I might have spoken to 
the Comte de Charmilles ; but I refrained, determining to 
wait till after the feast of Noel. I was sure of his consent. 
I felt convinced that he and my father had already spoken 
together on the subject, and as for Pauline herself — 
ah ! if looks had eloquence, if the secret pressure of a 
hand, the sudden smile, the quick blush, meant anything 
at all, then surely she loved me! There were no ob- 
stacles in the way of our union, and it was impossible to in- 
vent any ; all was smooth sailing, fair skies above, calm 
seas below ; and we, out of all the people in the world, 
should probably be the happiest living. So I thought, and 
I made many pleasant plans, never considering for a mo- 
ment how foolish it is to make plans beforehand for any- 
thing •, but, remember, I was very young, and Heloise St. 
Cyr was quite right when she said I did not yet under- 
stand women. 

We lived alone, my father and I, at Neuilly, in a large 
old quaint mansion, part of which had been standing at 
the time of the famous Reign of Terror. The rooms were 
full of antique furniture, such as would have been the joy 
of connoisseurs, and everything, even to the smallest 
trifle, was kept in the exact order in which my mother had 



WORMWOOD. 3t 

left it seventeen years previously, when she died giving 
birth to a girl-child who survived her but a few hours. 
One of the earliest impressions of my life is that of the 
hush of death in the house, the soft stepping to and fro 
of the servants, the drawn blinds, the smell of incense and 
burning candles ; and I rememlier how, with a beating 
heart, I, as a little fellow, stopped outside the door of the 
closed room and whispered, ^'' Maman ! petite ma?na?if'* 
in a voice rendered so weak by fright that I myself could 
scarcely hear it. And then, how, on a sudden impulse, I 
entered the mysteriously darkened chamber, and saw a 
strange white beautiful figure lying on the bed with lilies 
in its hair ; a figure that held encircled in one arm a tiny 
waxen creature that looked as pretty and gentle as the lit- 
tle Jesus in the church creche at Christmas-time, and how, 
after staring at this sight bewildered for a minute's space, 
I became aware of my father kneeling at the bedside, his 
strong frame shaken with such convulsive sobs as were 
terrible to hear, so terrible, that I, breaking into a child- 
ish wailing, fled to his arms for shelter, and stayed there 
shuddering, clasped to his heart and feeling his hot tears 
raining on my hair. That was a long, long while ago ! It 
is odd that I should recollect every detail of that scene so 
well at this distance of time ! 

I have said that my father had a special friend with 
whom he loved to talk and argue on all the political and 
philosphical questions that came up for discussion, 
namely. Monsieur Vaudron, the Cure of our parish. He 
was a good man — perfectly unaffected, simple-hearted, 
and honest. Imagine, an honest priest ! It is a sufficient 
rarity in France. He was in earnest, too. He believed 
in Our Lady and his patron saint with unflinching fervor 
and tenacity. It was no use bringing the heavy batteries 
of advanced science to storm his little citadel. He stood 
firm. 

" Talk as you will," he would say, " there is always 
something left that you cannot understand. No ! neither 
you nor M. Renan, nor any other overwise theorist liv- 
ing, and for me that Something is Everything. When 
you can explain away that little inexplicable — why then, 
who knows ! — I may go as far and even further than any 
heretic of the age " — here he would smile and rub his 
hands complacently — " but //// then '* An expressive 



32 



WORMWOOD. 



gesture would complete the sentence, and both my father 
and I liked and respected him too well to carry on any 
ultra-positive views on religion in his presence. 

One evening late in November, M. Vaudron called 
upon us, as it was often his custom to do, after supper, 
with an expression of countenance that betokened some 
vexation and anxiety. 

" To speak truly, I am worried," he said at last, in an> 
swer to my father's repeated inquiries as to whether any- 
thing was wrong with him. " And I am full of uncom- 
fortable doubts and presentiments. I am to have an un- 
expected addition to my poor household in the person of 
my nephew, who is studying to be a priest. You never 
heard of my nephew .-* No. I never thought I should 
have occasion to speak of him. He is the only son of 
my only sister, who married a respectable, somewhat 
wealthy farmer possessing house and lands in Brittany. 
They settled in that province, and have never left it ; and 
this boy — I suppose he must be about twenty-two — has 
seen no other city larger than the town of Rennes, where 
he began and has since carried on his studies. Now, his 
parents wish him to see Paris, and continue his probation 
with me ; this is all very well, but you know how I live, 
and you can imagine how my old Margot will look upon 
such an unexpected invasion ! '* 

We smiled. Margot was the good Cure's cook, house- 
keeper, and domestic tyrant ; a withered little woman, 
something like a dried apple, one of those apples that you 
have to cut into pretty deeply before you find the sweet- 
ness that lurks at its core. She had a sharp tongue, too, 
had Margot, and however much the Curd might believe 
in his priestly power to exorcise the devil, it was certain 
he could never exorcise his old cook's love of scolding 
out of her. He was ludicrously afraid of her wrath, and 
he surveyed us now as he spoke with a most whimsical 
air of timidity and supplication. 

" You see, man ami^'' he continued, addressing my 
father who, smoking comfortably, glanced at him with a 
keen yet friendly amusement, "this nephew, whom I do 
not know, may be troublesome.'* 

" Assuredly he may ! " agreed my father solemnly, yet 
with a t-winkle in his eye. " Young men are proverbially 
difhcult to manage," 



IVORMIVOOD. 33 

" They are — they arc ! I am sure of that ! " and the 
Cure' shook his head in a desponding manner. " But 
still I cannot refuse the request of my only sister, the 
first request she has ever made of me since her marriage !• 
Besides, if I would refuse, it is too late, the boy is on his 
way — he will be here to-morrow, and I must break the 
news somehow to Margot, it will be difficult — mo?i Dieii ! 
it will be very difficult — but it must be done ! " 

And he heaved such a profound sigh, that I, who had 
been glancing up and down the flimsy columns of the 
" Petit Journal," to avoid interrupting the conversation 
of my elders, suddenly gave way to irresistible laughter. 
My merriment was contagious ; the picture of M. Vau- 
dron trembling like an aspen-leaf before the little waspish 
Margot and faltering forth the news that henceforth, for a 
time at least, she would have to wait upon two men in- 
stead of one, and proffering his mild apologies for the 
same, struck us all with an overwhelming sense of the 
ridiculous, even the Cure' himself, whose laughter was as 
loud and long as my father's or mine. 

" Ah well ! " he said at last, wiping away the drops of 
mirth from his eyes. " I know I am an old fool, and 
that I allow Margot to have her own way a little too 
much — but then she is a good soul, a very good soul ! 
and truly she takes care of me as I never could take care 
of myself. And how well she washes the church linen ! 
Could anything be more spotlessly white and fit for holy 
service ! She is an excellent woman — I assure you, ex- 
cellent ! but regarding this nephew " 

" Ah, that is a serious question ! " murmured my father, 
who seemed mischievously determined not to help him 
out with any solution of his difficulty. " He is coming, 
you say, to-morrow ? " 

" He is — he is, without a doubt ! " replied poor M. 
Vaudron, with another forlorn shake of his head. " And 
as he will probably arrive before noon, there is very little 
time to prepare Margot for his arrival. You see I would 
not wash to blame my good sister for the world, but I 
think — I think she has been a little hasty in this matter ; 
she has given me no chance of refusal, not that I could 
have refused her ; but I might have arranged better, had 
more time been given me. However, I suppose I must 
do my utmost for the boy." 

3 , ' 



34 WORMlvbOD 

Here he broke off and rubbed his nose perplexedly, 

" What is he like, this nephew of yours ? " I put in 
suddenly. " Have you any idea ? " 

" Truly, not much," he replied thoughtfully, " I never 
saw him but once, and then he was only three years old, 
a fine child, if I remember rightly. If one is to believe 
in his mother's description of him (but that, of course, 
cannot be done) he is an intellectual marvel, a positive 
prodigy of good looks and wisdom combined ; there never 
was such a youth born into this planet before, according 
to her account, poor dear soul ! Ah ! good mothers are 
all- alike ; God has made their hearts the tenderest in the 
world ! " 

My father sighed a little. I knew he was thinking of 
the dead ; of his fair lost love, with whom had perished 
all mother's tenderness for me, at any rate. He rose, 
knocked the ashes out of his pipe and put it by, then 
looked round with a smile at the still perplexed and mus- 
ing Cur^. 

"Come, mo7i cher T^ he said cheerfully, "I know what 
you want as well as possible ! You want me to go 
around with you and help smooth this affair over with 
your old Margot. Is it not so ? Speak truly ! " 

"Ah, mo7i ami r^ cried poor M. Vaudron, rising from 
his chair in an ecstasy. " If you would but do me this 
favor ! She will listen to you ! she has the profoundest 
admiration for you, and she will understand reason from 
your lips ! You really will accompany me .'• ah, what it is 
to have so excellent a friend ! I shall owe you a thou- 
sand obligations for this kindness! there will no longer be 
any difficulty, and I shall be once more at ease ! But 
you are sure it is no trouble ? " 

While he thus spoke, my father had stepped into the 
hall and put on his coat and hat, and he now stood 
equipped for walking, his stalwart form and refined, 
rather melancholy face, offering a great contrast to the 
round dumpy figure and plump clean-shaven countenance 
of the good little Cure. 

"^//^«j- /" he said mirthfully. " We will start before 
it grows any later, and take Madame Margot by surprise. 
She is in love with mc, that old Margot of thine! I warn 
thee, Vaudron, that she has designs upon me ! She will 
need one of thy exordiums after mass next Sunday ; for I 



IVORMWOOD. 35 

will so confuse her with compliments on her house-man- 
agement, and on the excellent way in which she will cer- 
tainly purpose attending to thy nephew, that she will al- 
most believe herself to be young and marriageable once 
more ! " 

He laughed ; so did the Cure, and they prepared to 
leave the house together. I accompanied them to the 
street-door, and on the threshold my father turned round 
to me, saying — 

" Amuse thyself well, Gaston ! Art thou going to see 
the pretty Pauline this evening ? " 

The hot color surged to my brows ; but I made a pre- 
tence of indifference, and answered in the negative. 

" Ah well ! One night more or less in the week will 
not make much difference to thy feelings, or to hers. 
See, what a bright moon ! Thou canst play Romeo with 
real scenery ; is there no balcony to thy Juliet's win- 
dow .? " 

And with this sort of badinage, mingled with laughter, 
the two elderly gentlemen descended the steps, and cross- 
ing the road arm-in-arm were soon lost to sight in an op- 
posite avenue of trees. I stayed a minute or two at the 
open door, looking after them, and puffing slowly at my 
half-finished cigarette. They knew — they guessed, my 
love for Pauline ; it was probable every one knew or 
guessed it. I might as well speak openly, and at once to 
the Comte de Charmilles ; why not to-morrow ? Yes, 
to-morrow ! I resolved I would do so. And to-morrow 
then, ah, God ! — I should be free to clasp my darling in 
my arms unreproved, to tell her how I had thought of her 
every minute of the day and night; how I adored her; 
how I worshipped her ; I should be allowed to kiss those 
soft sweet lips, and touch those lovely curls of loose 
brown hair ! she would be mine, betrothed to me ! The 
very thought made me tremble with my own eagerness 
and ecstasy, and, to calm myself, I went abruptly indoors, 
and began to busy my brain w'ith certain financial cal- 
culations and reports which demanded the closest atten- 
tion. And while I was thus engaged, softly whistling a 
tune as I worked for pure lightness of heart, the moon 
soared high up like a great beacon, flooding the room in 
"which 1 sat with strange ghostly beams of silver and 
green, one green ray falling right across the paper on 



36 WORMWOOD. 

which I was scribbling, and shining with such a con- 
spicuous brilliancy that it almost dimmed the brightness 
of the Ht lamp over my head. I stopped writing to look 
at it, it flickered with a liquid pale radiance like the 
lustre of an emerald, or t/ie color of absinthe. It moved 
away after a while, and I went on with my work. But 
I well remember the weird, almost spectral loveliness 
of the skies that night, the weather was so calm and 
frostily clear. When my father came back in about an 
hour's time, after having been triumphantly successful a:^ 
intermediator between the Cure and his old Margot, he 
remarked to me, as we went upstairs to our bedrooms — 

" The unexpected nephew of M. Vaudron will have 
fine weather for his journey ! " 

" Excellent ! " I agreed, stifling a yawn, for I was 
rather sleepy. " By the way, what is the unexpected 
nephew's name ? " 

" Silvion Guidel." 

I stopped on the stairs. 

" Silvion Guidel ! A strange name, surely ? " 

" It sounds strange, yes ! but ' Guidel' is an old Brittany 
name, so Vaudron tells me ; ' Silvion ' is certainly not so 
common as ' Sylvain,' yet they are very nearly alike." 

" True ! " and I said no more. But I thought several 
times, at odd waking moments during the night, of that 
name — Silvion Guidel — and wondered what sort of being 
he was that bore it. He was studying to be a priest, so it 
■was not likely that /should see much of him. However, 
a curious sense of irritation grew up in me that this fellow 
from Brittany should becoming to Paris at all. I disliked 
him already, even while admitting to myself that such a 
dislike was altogether foolish and unreasonable. And the 
name, " Silvion Guidel " haunted me then, even as it 
haunts me now ; only then it suggested nothing, save a 
faint inexplicable sense of aversion ; but now ? — now it is 
written before me in letters of fire ! it stares at me from 
every clear blank space of wall ; it writes itself beneath 
my feet on the ground, and above me in the heavens ; I 
never lose the accursed sight of it ! I never shall ! never, 
never 1 until I die I 



^OKM^VOUt* 



37 



IV. 

The next day I carried out my previous night's resolu- 
tion to ask the Comte de Charmilles for his daughter's 
hand in marriage. As I expected, I was met with entire 
favor, and when I left the old aristocrat's library, after 
about an hour's satisfactory conversation, I had his full 
parental permission to go straightway to Pauline and tell 
her of my passion. How my heart beat, how my pulses 
galloped, as I stepped swiftly along the corridor in search 
of my soul's idol ! She usually sat with her cousin in a 
small boudoir fronting on the garden ; and she was gen- 
erally at home at this early hour of the afternoon ; but for 
once I could not find her. Where was she, I wondered? 
Perhaps in the large drawing-room, though she seldom 
went there, that apartment being only used occasionally 
for the reception of visitors. However I turned in that 
direction, and was just crossing the passage, when I was 
brought to an abrupt standstill by the sound of music, 
such music as might have been played by Orpheus to 
charm his lost bride out of hell. I listened amazed and 
entranced ; it was a violin that discoursed such wild 
melody ; some one was playing it with so much 7'erve and 
fire and feeling, that it seemed as though every throbbing 
note were a burning thing alive, with wings to carry it to 
and fro in the air forever. I pushed open the door of the 
drawing-room suddenly, and stared at its solitary inmate 
dumfoundered ; why, it was that pale and quiet H^loise 
St. Cyr who stood there, her bow lifted, her features alit 
with enthusiasm, her bright hair ruffled, and her large 
eyes ablaze ! What a face ! what an attitude! she was 
actually beautiful, this woman, and I had never perceived 
it before ! When she saw me she started ; then, in a 
moment, regained her self-possession, laid down her bow, 
and, still holding the violin, advanced a little. 

You want Pauline ? " she asked, slightly smiling. 



38 WORMIVOOD. 

** She will be down directly. She is upstairs changing her 
dress, she and my aunt have just returned from a drive in 
the Bois — they found it \ery cold." 

I looked at her, feeling stupid and tongue-tied, I 
wanted to say something about her marvellous plaj-ing, 
biii at the moment could find no words. Her eyes met 
mine steadily, the faint smile still lurking in their clear 
depths, and after a brief pause she spK)ke again. 

*' I was practising 3 " And placing the violin against 
her slim white throat, she ran her fingers dumbly up and 
down the strings. " I seldom have the chsmce of a couple 
of hours all to myself, but this afternoon I managed to 
escap>e from the drive. My aunt went to call at the house 
of >I. Vaudron, in order to leave her card for his nephew, 
who has just arrived." 

I was considerably surprised at this, and very quickly 
found voice to remonstrate. 

" Surely Madame la Comtesse has been almost too 
courteous in this regard ? " I said. " The young man is 
a perfect stranger, the mere son of a farmer in Brit- 
tany " 

*^^ Pardon f^ interrupted Heloise. "He is already 
highly distinguished for learning and scholarship, and a 
special letter of introduction and reconmiendation con- 
cerning him came by last night's |>ost for my uncle from 
the Prior of Sl Xa^-ier s monastery at Rennes. The Prior 
is one of my uncle's dearest and oldest friends, thus, you 
see, it is quite en regie that this Monsieur Guidel should re- 
ceive his first welcome from the house of De Charmilles." 

Again she ran her delicate fingers up and down the 
strings of her \'iolin, and again that unreasonable sense 
of irritation which had possessed me during the past 
night possessed me now. All things seemed to conspire 
together to make this Breton fellow actually one of our 
intimate circle ! 

"Will Mademoiselle Pauline be long, do you think?" 
I asked rather crossly. " I am anxious to see her ; I 
have her father's permission to speak to her in pri\'ate." 

What a curious change passed over her face as I said 
these words! She exidently guessed my errand, and 
there was something in her ex'pression that was p>er- 
plexing and difficult to decipher. She locked stanled, 
scrr)', vaguely troubled, and I wondered why. Presently, 



IVOKMIVOOD, 39 

layin<x down her violin, she came towards me and touched 
my aim i^ontly, ahnost pleadingly. 

'• \^o not be in a luiiiy, Monsieur Boauvais ! " she said 
very earnestly. '* I think — indeed 1 am sure — I know 
what you are going to say to Pauline ! But, give her 
time to think — plenty of time ! she is so very young, she 
scarcely knows her own mind. Oh, do not be angry with 
me, indeed I speak for the best ! I have lived with my 
cousin so long, — in truth, 1 have seldom been away from 
her, except when she went to her finishing school in 
Switzerland three years ago ; but before that we were 
both educated at the Convent of the Sacre Canir to- 
gether. I know her nature thoroughly ! She is sweet, 
she is good, she is a little angel of beauty ; but she does 
not understand what love is, she cannot even translate 
the passing emotions of her own heart. Vou must be 
very patient with her ! give her time to be quite sure of 
herself, for now she is not sure, she cannot be sure ! " 

Her voice thrilled with quite a plaintive cadence, and 
her strange eyes, which I now noticed were a sort of 
gray-green color like the tint of the sea before a storm, 
filled with tears. But I was extremely angry; angr)' with 
her for speaking to me at all on the subject of my amour \ 
it was none of her business ! She had her doubts, this 
pale, serious, cold woman as to the possibility of Pau- 
line's having any real love for me, that was evident. 
Well, she should find out her mistake ! She should 
soon see how fondly and truly my darling returned my 
passion ! 

** Mademoiselle," I said frigidly, '' you are exceedingly 
good to concern yourself so deeply with the question of 
your cousin's happiness! I am grateful to you, I assure 
you, as grateful perhaps as even she herself can be ; but 
at present I think the matter is best left in my hands. 
You may be quite certain that I shall urge nothing upon 
Mademoiselle de Charmilles that will be in any way dis- 
tressing to her, my sole desire being to make her life, so 
far as I am able, one of perfect felicity. As for the com- 
prehension of love, I think that comes instinctively to all 
women of marriageable age. Surely you yourself " — and 
I spoke in a more bantering tone — "cannot be ign(^rant 
of its meanin;^ ! If vou loved any one, you would not 
require much time to mink about it ? " 



46 tP'ORMlVOOiy. 

" Yes, indeed I should ! " she replied slowly. " I 
should need time to commune with my own heart, to ask 
it if all this panting passion, this restless fever, would 
last? Whether it were but a fancy of the moment, a 
dream of the hour, or the never-to-be-quenched fire of 
love indeed — love in its perfect strength and change- 
less fiaelity — love absolutely unselfish, pure, and death- 
less ? I should need time to know myself and my lover, 
and to feel that our two spirits merged into one as 
harmoniously as the two notes in this perfect chord ! " 

And taking up her violin, she drew the bow across the 
strings. A sweet and solemn sound, organ-like in tone, 
floated through the room with such a penetrating rich- 
ness that the very air seemed to pulsa tearound me in faint 
yet soothing echoes. What a strange creature she was, 
I thought ! and a quick sigh escaped my lips uncon- 
sciously. 

" I did not know you played the violin, Mademoiselle," 
I began hastily, and with a touch of embarrassment. 

" Fr(3!/w^;z//" and she smiled. "But that is not sur- 
prising ! You do not know, and it is probable you never 
will know anything at all about me ! I am a very un- 
interesting person ; it is not worth any one's while to 
study me. Listen ! " — and she held up hsr finger as a 
clear voice rang through the house carolling a lively 
strain from one of the operettas popular at that time — • 
" there is Pauline ; she is coming this way. One word 
more, M. Beauvais " — and she turned swiftly upon me 
with an air of almost imperial dignity — " if you are 
modest and wise, you will remember what I have said to 
you ; if you are conceited and foolish, you will forget ! 
Au rei'oir I " 

And before I had time to answer her, she had vanished, 
taking her violin with her, and leaving me in a state of 
mingled perplexity and vague annoyance. However, as 
I have before stated, I never paid much attention to W€- 
loise St. Cyr, or attached any great importance to her 
opinions; and on this occasion I soon dismissed her from 
my mind, for in another minute an ethereal vision clad in 
soft pink and white draperies, with a curly dark head and 
a pair of laughing deep blue eyes, appeared at the open 
door of the room, and Pauline herself entering, stretched 
out both her hands in gay greeting. 



IVOKAfWOOD. 4t 

^^ Bon jour^ Monsieur Gaston! How long have you 
been here, making love to Heloise? Ah, mechant I I 
know how very bad you are ! What ! you come to see 
me — only me ? Oh, yes, that is a very pretty way to excuse 
youiself? Then why was Heloise crying as she passed 
me ? You have vexed her, and I shall not forgive you, 
for I love her dearly ! " 

" Crying ! " I stammered in amazement. " Mademoi- 
selle St. Cyr ? Why, she was as bright as possible just 
now; she has been playing her violin " 

" Yes ; she plays it only when she is sad," and Pauline 
nodded her head sagely, " never when she is happy. So 
that I know something is not well with her; and who am 
I to blame for it ? It must be your fault ! I shall blame 

" J/^/" I stared helplessly, then smiled, for I at once 
perceived she was only jesting, and I watched her with 
my heart beating quick hammer-strokes, as she sank 
lazily down in a cushioned ottoman near the fire, and held 
out her little hands to the warmth of the red glow. 

We have been driving in the Bois, mamma and I, and 
it was so cold ! " she said, with a delicate frissonement of 
her pretty figure. " Heloise was wise to remain at home. 
Only she missed seeing Monsieur Antinous from Brit-, 
tany ! " 

Engrossed as I was with my own thoughts and the con- 
templation of her beauty — for I was wondering how I 
should begin my declaration of love — this last sentence ol 
hers impressed me unpleasantly. 

" Do you mean the nephew of M. Vaudron ? " I in- 
quired, with, no doubt, a touch of annoyance in my aC' 
cents which she, woman-like, was quick to notice. 

" Yes, truly ! I do mean the nephew of M. Vaudron ! " 
she replied, a little sparkle of malicious mirth lighting up 
her lovely eyes. "He has arrived. Oh qu'il est beau) 
He is a savage from Brittany — a forest philosopher — very 
wise, very serious, very good ! Ah, so good ! He is 
going to be a priest, you know, and he looks so grave and 
tranquil that one feels quite wicked in his presence. Ah, 
you frown ! " and, laughing, she clapped her hands gayly. 
" You are jealous — jealous because I say M. Silvion 
Guidel is handsome ! " 

"Jealous!" I exclaimed, with some heat, "I.'* Why 



42 WORMWOOD. 

should I be ? I know nothing about the young man-— 
/ have not seen him yet ! When I do I will tell you 
frankly what I think of him. Meanwhile " — here I gath- 
ered my hesitating courage together — " Pauline, I want to 
speak to you ; will you be serious for a moment and listen 
to me ? " 

" Serious?" and a surprised look flitted over her face. 
Then, as I fixed my ardent gaze upon her, a deep blush 
colored her fair cheeks and brow, and she quickly rose 
from her chair with a sudden movement of fear or timidity, 
making as though she would have fled from the room. 
But I caught her hands and held her fast, and all the 
pent-up longing of my soul found utterance in words. 
Her beauty, her irresistible sweetness, my deep and 
deathless love, the happiness we would enjoy when once 
united, — these were the themes on which I discoursed 
with the fiery eloquence and pleading of a troubadour ; 
though, truly I scarcely knew what I said, so over- 
whelming was the released tide of my excitement and 
ardor. And she ? She trembled a little at first, but 
soon grew very quiet, and, still allowing me to hold her 
hands, looked up with an innocent vague wonder. 

"You really want to marry me. Monsieur Gaston?" 
she asked, a faint smile parting her lips. " Soon ? " 

" Soon ? " I echoed passionately. " Would I might 
claim you to-morrow as my bride, Pauline ! then should I 
be the happiest of men ! But you have not answered me, 
mo?i ange ! " And now I ventured to put my arm about 
her and draw her to my breast, while I adopted the 
endearing " thou " of more familiar speech. " Dost thou 
love m.e, Pauline — even as I love thee ? " 

She did not answer at once, and a cold dread seized 
my heart; was H^loi'se St. Cyr right after all, and was 
she not sure of herself ? A meditative expression dark- 
ened her eyes into lovelier hues ; she seemed to consider ; 
and I watched her in an agonized suspense that almost 
stopped my breath. Then, with a swift action, as though 
she threw all reflection to the winds, she laughed, and 
nestled her pretty head confidingly against my shoulder. 

" Oui^ mon Gaston I I love thee ! Thou art good and 
kind ; papa is pleased with thee, maman also ; we shall 
be very, very happy ! Oh^ qurl haiser .f^ for I had in the 
relief and ecstasy of ihe moment pressed my flrst love- 



IVOKMIVOOD, 4;J 

kiss on her sweet mouth. " Must we always kiss each 
other now ? Is it necessary ? " 

*' Not necessary to thee, perhaps ! " I whispered ten- 
derly, kissing her again. " But it is to me ! " 

With an impulsive half-petulant movement, she drew 
herself suddenly away from my embrace ; then, apparently 
regretting the hastiness of this action, she came once more 
towards me, and, folding her hands in demure fashion on 
my arm, looked at me searchingly, as though she sought 
to read my very soul. 

^'' PauT7'e garden !'' she sighed softly, "thou dost truly 
love me t very, very dearly } " 

More dearly, I assured her, than my own life ! 

" It is very kind of thee," she said, with a pretty plaint- 
iveness, " for I am very stupi--^ and every one says thou 
art such a clever man ! It "s good for us to marry, is it 
not, Gaston ? Thou art •>ure ? " 

*' If we love each other — yes, my Pauline ! Of course 
it is good for us to marry ! " I answered eagerly, a vague 
fear arising in my mind lest she should retract or hesitate. 
She waited with downcast eyes for a minute, and then 
glanced up at me radianlly smiling. 

"Then we ivill marry!" she said. "We will live at 
Neuilly, and papa and maman will visit us, and Heloise 
will come and see us, and we shall please everybody! 
Oestjini! So ! " and she dropped me a mischievous lit- 
tle courtesy. '■''Me voici^AIonsieur Gaston ! voire jolie petite 
Jia7icee I a votre service!'''' 

She looked so ravishingly pretty and enchanting that I 
was about to snatch her in my arms and kiss her again 
and yet again, when the door opened and the discreet 
Comtesse de Charmilles entered with a serene and gra- 
cious kindliness of manner that plainly evinced her knowl- 
edge and approval of the situation. She glanced smil- 
ingly from her daughter to me, and from me back to her 
daughter, and straightway comprehended that all was well. 

" Bo7ijour^ monfils!^' she said gently, laying a slight 
emphasis on the affectionate title, and adopting the 
tutoyer form cf address without further ceremony. 
"Thou art very welcome ! Thou wilt stay and dine this 
evening? M. de Charmilles has gone to persuade thy 
father to join us, and INT. Vnudron is coming also, with 
his nephew, M. Silvion Guidel." 



44 WOEMH^OOD. 



V. 

I HAVE forgotten many things. Many circumstances 
that 1 might otherwise have remembered are now, thanks 
to the merciful elixir of love, effaced from my brain as 
utterly as though they had been burnt out with fire ; but 
that one night in my life — the night of my betrothal to 
Pauline de Charmilles — remains a fixture in my memory, 
a sting implanted there to irritate and torture me when I 
would fain lose my very sense of being in the depths of 
oblivion. It was a marked evening in many respects, 
marked, not only by my triumph as Pauline's accepted 
lover, but also by the astonishing and bewildering pres- 
ence of the man Silvion Guidel. I say astonishing and 
bewildering, because that was the first effect his singular 
beauty made upon the most prejudiced and casual ob- 
server. It was not that he was in first flush of youth, and 
that his features still had all the fine transparency and 
glow of boyhood upon them ; it was not that his eyes, 
gray-black and fiery, seemed full of some potent magnetic 
force which compelled the beholder's fascinated gaze; no, 
it was the expression of the whole countenance that was 
so extraordinarily interesting, an expression such as an 
inspired painter might strive to convey into the visage of 
some ideal seraph of patience and wisdom supernal. I, 
like every one else at the house of the De Charmilles 
that night, found myself attracted against my will by the 
graceful demeanor and refined courtesy of this son of a 
Brittany farmer, this mere provincial, whose face and 
figure would have done honor to the most brilliant aris- 
tocratic assemblage. The former instinctive aversion I 
had felt witli regard to him subsided for the time being, 
and I listened as attentively as any one at table when- 
ever his voice, melodious as a bell, chimed in with our 
conversalion. I was perfectly happy myself, for in a few 
brief words, simple and suited to the occasion, the Comte 



WORMWOOD, 45 

de Charmilles had announced to all present the news of 
his daughter's engagement to me. When he did so I 
glanced quickly at llcloise St. Cyr, but though she looked 
even paler than usual she gave no sign either of surprise 
or pleasure. My father had then, in his turn, proposed 
the health of the "chers fianct^s," which was drunk with 
readiness by all except Silvion Guid^l, who never touched 
wine. He apologized for this lack of bo?i ca7naraderie^ 
and was about to raise a glass of water to his lips, in 
order to join in the toast, when Heloise spoke across the 
table in swift eager accents. 

" Do not drink my cousin's health in water, AI. Gui- 
dbl ! " she said. " It is unlucky, and your wishes may 
prove fatal to them both ! " 

He smiled, and at once set down the glass. 

" You are superstitious, mademoiselle ! " he replied, 
gently bending his handsome head towards her. " But I 
will not try to combat your feeling. I will content my- 
self with a silent prayer in my heart for your cousin's 
happiness, a prayer which, though it may not find expres- 
sion in words, is none the less sincere." 

His voice was so serious and soft and full of emotion, 
that it left an impression of gravity upon us ; that vague 
subdued sensation that comes across the mind when the 
little bell rings at mass, and the people kneel before the 
Host unveiled. And then I saw the meditative eyes of 
H^Ioi'se rest upon the Breton stranger with a curiously 
searching earnestness in their gray-green depths, a look 
that seemed to be silently indicative of a desire to know 
more of his character, life, and aims. The dinner went 
on, and we were all conversing more or less merrily on 
various desultory matters, when she quite suddenly asked 
him the question — 

" Are you really going to be a priest, Monsieur Gui- 
del ? " 

He turned his dark picturesque face in her direction. 

" I hope so, God willing ! As my revered uncle will 
tell you, I have studied solely for the priesthood." 

" Yes, that may be," returned He'loise, a faint color 
creeping through the soft pallor of her cheeks. " But 
pardon me ! you seem also to have studied many things 
not necessary to religion. For instance " 

" Now, Heloise, petite fem7ne Socrate ! " exclaimed the 



46 WORMWOOD 

Comte de Charmilles good-naturedly. " What art thoa 
going to say out of thy stores of wisdom ? You must 
understand, M. Guidel " — and he turned to the person he 
addressed — " my niece is a great student of the classics, 
and is well versed in the literature of many nations, so 
that she often puts me to shame by her knowledge of the 
strange and wonderful works done by men of genius in 
this world for the benefit of the ignorant. Excuse her, 
therefore, if she trespasses on yoicr ground of learning ; I 
have often told her that she studies like a man." 

Silvion Guidel bowed courteously, and looked towards 
Heloise with renewed interest. 

" I am proud to have the honor of being addressed by 
one who has the air of a Corinne, and is no doubt the 
possessor of more than Corinne's admirable qualities ! " 
he said suavely„ " You were observing, mademoiselle, 
that I seem to have studied things not altogether neces- 
sary to religion. In what way do you consider this 
proved ? " 

Heloise met his gaze very fixedly. 

*' I heard you speaking with my uncle some minutes 
ago, of science," she answered, " of modern science in 
particular, and its various wonderful discoveries. Now 
do you not find something in that branch of study, 
which confutes much of the legendary doctrine of the 
Church ? '* 

" Much that seems to confute it, yes," he returned 
quietly, " but which, if pursued far enough, would, I am 
fully persuaded, strengthen our belief instead of weaken- 
ing it. I am not afraid of science, mademoiselle ; my 
faith is firm ! " 

Here he raised his magnificent eyes with the expression 
of a rapt saint, and again we felt that embarrassed 
gravity stealing over us as if we were in church instead 
of at dinner. M. Vaudron, good-hearted man, was pro- 
foundly touched. 

" Well said, Silvion, mo?i gar^on ? " he said with 
tender seriousness. " When the good God has once 
drawn our hearts to the love of His Holy service, it 
matters little what the learning or the philosophy of the 
world can teach us. The world and the things of the 
world are always on the surface, but the faith of a servant 
of the Church is implanted deep in the soul [ " 



il'ORnfivooD. 47 

He nodded his head several times with pious sedate- 
ness, then, relapsing into smiles, added, '* Not that even 
I can boast of such strong faith as my old Margot after 
all ! She has a favorite saint, St. Francis of Assisi ; she 
has made a petticoat for his image which she keeps in 
her sleeping-chamber, and whenever she wishes to obtain 
any special favor she sticks a pin in the petticoat, with 
the most absolute belief that the saint noticing that pin, 
will straightway remember what he has to do for her, 
without any further reminder ! " 

We laughed, — I say laey but Silvion Guid^l did not 
laugh. 

*' It is very touching and very beautiful," he said, "that 
quaint faith of the lower classes concerning special 
intercession. I have never been able to see anything 
ridiculous in the superstition which is born of ignorance ; 
as well blame an innocent child for believing in the 
pretty fancies taken from fairy-tales, as scoff at the poor 
peasant for trusting that one or other of the saints will 
have a special care of his vineyard or field of corn. I 
love the ignorant 1 they are our flock, our * little ones,' 
whom we are to guide and instruct ; if all were wise in 
the world " 

" There would be no necessity for churches or priests ! " 
I put in hastily. 

My father frowned warningly ; and I at once perceived 
I had ruffled the devout feelings of the Comte de 
Charmilles who nevertheless, remembering that I was the 
excellent match he had just secured for his daughter, 
refrained from allowing any angry observation to escape 
him. Silvion Guidel however, looked straight at me, and 
as his brilliant eyes flashed on mine, the aversion I had 
felt for him before I ever saw him sprang up afresh in 
my mind. 

" iMonsieur is of the new school of France .? " he in- 
quired with the faintest little curl of mockery dividing 
his delicate lips. " He possibly entertains — as so many 
do — the progressive principles of atheist and republican ?" 

The blood rushed to my face ; his manner angered me^ 
and I should have answered him with a good deal of heat 
and impatience, had I not felt a soft little hand suddenly 
steal into mine and press my fingers appealingly. It 
was Pauline's hand ; she was a timid creature, and she 



48 WORMWOOD. 

dreaded any sort of argument, lest it might lead to high 
words and general unpleasantness. But whatever I might 
have said was forestalled by M. Vaudron, who addressed 
his nephew gently, yet with a touch of severity too. 

" Tais-toi — tais-toi, mo?i-ga^z f " he said, using the old 
Breton term of endearment, ' Monsieur Gaston Beauvais 
is a young man like thee, and in all probability he is no 
more certain of his principles than thou art ! It takes a 
long while to ripen a man's sense of right and honor 
into a fixed guiding-rule for life. Those who are re- 
publicans in the flash of their impetuous youth may be 
Royalists or Imperialists when they arrive at mature man- 
hood ; those who are atheists when they first commence 
their career, may become devout servants of heaven 
before they have reached the middle of their course. 
Patience for all and prejudice for none ! otherwise we, as 
followers of Christ, lay ourselves open to just blame. 
You are boys — both you and Monsieur Gaston ; as boys 
you must be judged by your elders, till tini,e and experi- 
ence give you the right to be considered as men." 

This little homily was evidently very satisfactory to 
both my father and the Comte de Charmilles. Silvion 
Guidel bowed respectfully, as he always did whenever his 
uncle spoke to him, and the conversation again drifted 
into more or less desultory channels. When the ladies 
left the dinner-table for the drawing-room, Guidel crossed 
over and took Pauline's vacated seat next to mine. 

" I must ask you to pardon me ! " he said softly, 
under cover of a discussion on finance, which was being 
carried on by the other gentlemen. " I feel that I spoke 
to you rudely and roughly, and I am quite ashamed. 
Will you forget it and be friends 1 " 

He extended his hand. There was a soft, caressing 
grace about him that was indescribably fascinating ; his 
beautiful countenance was like that of a pleading angel, 
his eyes bright with warmth and sympathy. I could do 
no less than take his proffered hand in my own, and 
assure him of my esteem, and though my words were 
brief and scarcely enthusiastic, he seemed quite satisfied. 

*'How lovely she is!" he then said in the same con- 
fidential tone, leaning back in his ciiair and smiling a 
little. " How like a fairy dream ! It is impossible to 
imagine a more enchanting creature ! " 



IVOA'AfJVOOD. 49 

I looked at him surprised. I had got the very foolish 
idea Into my head that the devotees of religion never 
perceived a woman's beauty. 

" You mean " I began. 

" I mean your lovely fiande^ Mademoiselle de Char- 
milles ! Ah ! you are indeed to be congratulated ! She is 
like some fair saint in a sculptured niche where the light 
falls through rose-colored windows, her eyes have so pure 
a radiance in them! an innocence such as is seen in the 
eyes of birds ! She would infuse into the dullest mind 
gleams of inspired thought ; she is the very model of 
what we might imagine Our Lady to have been before the 
Annunciation ! " 

" You are more likely to be a poet than a priest ! " I 
said, amazed and vaguely vexed at his enthusiasm. 

He smiled. "' Mo7i afjii, religion is poetry, — poetry is 
religion. The worship of beauty is as holy a service as 
the worship of the beauty-creating Divinity. There is a 
great deal of harm done to the church by bigotry — the 
priesthood are too fond of sackcloth and ashes, peni- 
tence and prayer. They should look out upon the mirror 
of the world, and see life reflected there in all its varying 
dark and brilliant colors, then, raising their thoughts to 
heaven, they should appeal for grace to understand these 
wonders and explain them to the less enlightened multi- 
tude. The duty of a priest is, to ray thinking, to preach 
of happiness and hope, not sorrow and death. If ever I 
become an ordained servant of Christ " — here he raised 
his eyes devoutly and made almost imperceptibly the 
sign of the Cross — " I shall make it my province to preach 
joy ! I shall speak of the flowers, the birds and trees, of 
the stars and their inexhaustible marvels, of the great 
rivers and greater oceans, of the blessedness of life,' of 
everything that is fair and gracious and suggestive or 
promise ! " 

" Would you take the beauty of woman as a text, for 
example .-* " I asked incredulously. 

"Why not .-* " he answered calmly. "The beauty of 
woman is one of the gifts of God, to gladden our eyes, it 
is not to be rejected or deemed unsacred. I should love 
to preach of beautiful women ! they are the reflexes of 
beautiful souls ! " 

" Not always ! " I said dryly, and with a slight scorn iox 

4 



50 WOEMWdOD. 

his ignoranceo " You have not lived in Paris, M. GuidH. 
There are lovely women at the cafes chantants ; and also 
at other places not mentionable to the ears of a student 
of religion ; women delicate as nymphs and dainty as 
flowers, who possess not a shred of character, and who 
have been veritable harpies of vice from their earliest 
years ! " 

A sudden interest flashed into his face. I noticed it 
with surprise, and he saw that I did, for a rich wave of 
color rushed up to his brows, and he avoided my gaze. 
Then an idea seemed to strike him, and he uttered it 
directly, with that faint tinge of mockery that once before 
had marked his accents when addressing me. 

" Ah ! yo2i have had a wider experience ! " he said softly, 
"you have met these — these Jia?'pies ? " 

I was indescribably irritated at this. What business 
had he to cast even the suspicion of such a slur on my 
manner of conduct ? I controlled my annoyance with 
difficulty, and replied curtly : — 

" You mistake ! No gentlema?t who cares a straw for 
his good reputation visits such low and despicable haunts 
as they inhabit. What I have told you I know by hear- 
say." 

" Indeed ! " and he sighed gently. " But one should 
always prove the truth of things before believing in an ill 
report. Virtue is so very easily calumniated ! " 

I laughed aloud. " Perhaps you would like to meet 
the harpies in question ? " I said half jestingly. 

He was not offended. He looked at me with the 
utmost seriousness. 

" I should ! " he admitted quite frankly. " If they have 
fallen, they can be raised up ; our Divine Lord never 
turned away in scorn from even a sinful woman ! " 

I uttered an impatient exclamation — but said no more, 
as just then the Comte de Charmilles rose from 
table, my father and the Cure following his example, and 
we all made our entrance into the drawing-room, v\'hcra 
the ladies awaited us, and where coffee was already pre- 
pared. I took instant advantage of my newly-gained 
privileges as Pauline's fiaiice to ensconce myself by her 
side, and, drawing a chair to where she sat toying v;ith 
some delicate embroidery, I conversed with her in that 
dulcet sotto-voce^ which, though very delightful and con- 



WORMWOOD. 



5' 



venient to the lovers concerned, is often peculiarly pro- 
voking to those left out in the cold. Once or twice 1 saw 
the would-be priest Guidcil glance at us with a singular 
flashing light in his eyes as though he had become sud- 
denly conscious that there were pleasanter things to be done 
than the chanting of masses, droning of " offices " and 
counting of rosary-beads ; but he was for the most part 
very reserved and quiet, only now and then joining in 
conversation with the Comte de Charmilles, yet proving 
himself whenever he did speak, to be unquestionably a 
man of rare intellectual endowment and splendid scholar- 
ship. I noticed that Heloise St. Cyr watched him with 
the deepest interest, and I jestingly called Pauline's 
attention to the fact. 

"Thy cousin is becoming enamored of the handsome 
Breton ! " I said. " Who knows but that she may not 
lead him altogether aside from his holier intentions ! " 

She looked at me, with a sudden rosy flush of color in 
her face. 

" Oh no ! " she murmured hastily, and there was, or so 
I then fancied, a touch of petulance in her accents. 
" That is impossible ! Heloise loves no one, she will 
love no one but — but me ! " 

I smiled, and taking her little hand in mine, studied all 
its pretty dimples and rose-tinted finger-tips. 

" Not yet, perhaps ! " I answered softly. " But a time 
for love will come to her, PauHne, even as to thee ! " 

" Are you sure it has come for me ? " she asked half 
timidly, half mischievously. " Are you so vain, Gaston, 
as to think that I — I — worship you, for instance ? " 

I raised my eyes to hers, and saw that she was smil- 
ing. 

" Worship is a strong word, my sweetest," I replied. 
*' It is for me to worship ! not for you ! And I do worship 
the fairest angel under heaven ! " 

And I furtively kissed the little hand I held. 

" Yes," she said, with a meditative air. " But, some- 
times, a woman may worship a man, may she not ? She 
may love him so much, that he may seem to her mind al- 
most more than God ? " 

" Assuredly she may ! " I rejoined slowly, and in some 
surprise, for she had spoken with unusual seriousness 
and passion ; " but, Pauline, such excess of love is rare, 



52 



WOKMWOOD. 



moreover, it is not likely to last, it is too violent and head- 
strong ; it is always unwise and often dangerous, and the 
priests would tell you it is wicked ! " 

" Yes, I am sure it is wicked ! " she acquiesced, sigh- 
ing a little, " dreadfully wicked ! and — and, as you say, 
dangerous." She paused ; the pensiveness passed from 
her bright face like a passing cloud from a star, and she 
laughed, a little low laugh of perfect contentment. 
" Well, be satisfied, Gaston ! I do not worship thee, so / 
am not wicked ! I am thy very good little fiancee, who 
is very, very fond of thee, and happy in thy company, 
voila tout ! " 

And, bending towards me, she took a rose from her 
bouquet-de-corsage, and fastened it in my button-hole, and 
I, enchanted by her sweet manner and coquettish grace, 
attached not the least importance to what she had just 
been saying. I remembered her words afterwards — after- 
wards, when I learnt the fact that a woman can indeed 
"worship" a man with such idolatrous fervor, that she 
will allow herself to be set down in the dust of contempt 
for his sake, aye ! and be torn and tortured to the very 
death rather than cease to adore ! Women are strange 
folk ! Some are cruel, some frivolous, some faithless ; but 
I believe they are nearly all alike in their immense, 
their boundless capacity for loving. Find me a woman 
who has never loved anything or anybody, and you wiU 
have found the one, the only marvel of the centuries 1 



WOXMIVOOIK 55 



VI. 

That same evening", the evening of Silvion GuidfePs 
introduction into our midst, Hdloise St. Cyr suddenly in- 
vested herself with the powers of an Arabian Nights en- 
chantress, and transferred us all whither she would on the 
magic swing of her violin-bow. Asa general rule, so her 
aunt told me, she never would exhibit her rare talent be- 
fore any listeners that were not of her own family, so her 
behavior on this occasion was altogether exceptional. It 
was Pauline who asked her to play, and probably the fact 
that it was her Httle cousin's betrothal-night induced 
her to accede to the eager request. Anyway, she made 
no difficulty about it, but consented at once, without the 
least hesitation. Pauline accompanied her on the piano, 
being careful to subdue her part of the performance to a 
delicate softness, so that we might hear, to its full splen- 
dor of tone and utmost fineness of silver sound, the mar- 
velous music this strange, pale, golden-haired woman 
flung out on the air in such wild throbs of passion that 
our very hearts beat faster as we listened. While she 
played, she was in herself a fit study for an artist ; she 
stood within the arched embrasure of a window, where 
the fall of the close-drawn rose silken curtains provided 
a lustrous background for her figure ; clad in a plain 
straight white gown, w^ith a flower to relieve its classical 
severity, her rounded arm had a snowy gleam, like that of 
marble, contrasted w'ith the golden-brown hue of her 
Amati violin. To and fro, with unerring grace and ex- 
quisite precision, swept that wand-like bow, with the ease 
and lightness of a willow-branch waving in the wind, and 
yet with a force and nerve-power that were absolutely as- 
tonishing in a woman-performer. Grand pleading notes 
came quivering to us from the sensitive fibre of the 
fourth string; delicate harmonies flew over our heads like 
fine foam-bells, breaking from a wave of tune : we cau^]?;^ 



54 



WORMWOOD. 



faint whispers of the sweetest spiritual confessions, 
prayers and aspirations ; we listened to the airy dancing 
of winged sylphs on golden floors of melody ; we heard 
the rustle of the nightingale's brown wings against cool 
green leaves, followed by a torrent of "full-throated" 
song; and when the player finally ceased, with a rich 
chord that seemed to divide the air like the harmonious 
roll of a dividing billow, we broke into a spontaneous 
round of enthusiastic applause. I sprang up from where 
I had been sitting, rapt in a silent ecstasy of attention, 
and poured out the praise which, being unpremeditated 
and heartfelt, was not mere flattery. She heard me, and 
smiled, a strange little wistful smile. 

" So you love music, Monsieur Gaston ! " she said. 
*' Does it teach you anything, I wonder ? " 

" Teach me anything } " I echoed. " Are you propos- 
ing enigmas, mademoiselle ? " 

Pauline looked round from the piano with a half-per- 
plexed expression on her lovely features. 

" That is one of Heloise's funny ideas," she declared. 
" Music teaches her, so she says, all sorts of things, not 
only beautiful, but terrible. Now /can see nothing ter- 
rible in music ! " 

Heloise bent over her swiftly, and kissed her curls. 

" No, cherie ; because you have never thought of any- 
thing sad. Even so may it always be ! " 

" Of course sorrow is expressed in music," said Silvion 
Guidel, who, almost unobserved, had joined our little 
group near the window, and now stood leaning one arm 
on the piano, regarding Pauline as he spoke, " sorrow 
and joy alternately ; but when sorrow and joy deepen into 
darker and more tragic colors, I doubt whether music can 
adequately denote absolute horror, frenzy, or remorse. 
A tragedy in sound seems to me almost impossible." 

"Yet language is sound," replied Heloise, "even as 
music is, and music is often able to go on with a story 
when language breaks off and fails. You would have 
your mind turned to a tragic key, M. Guidel ? Well, 
then, listen ! There is no greater tragedy than the 
ever-recurring one of love and death ; and this is a sad 
legend of both. Do not play, Pauline, ma douce I I will 
be an independent soloist this time ! " 

We all gazed at her in vague admiration as she took up 



IVORAflVOOD. 



55 



her violin once more, and be-^^.n to play a delicate prelude, 
more like the rippling of a b:xok than the sound of a 
stringed instrument. The thread of melody seemed to 
wander in and out through tufts of moss and budding 
violets ; and all at once, while we were still drinking in 
these dulcet notes, she ceased abruptly, and still holding 
the violin in position, recited aloud in a voice harmonious 
9& music itself — 

" EUe avait de beaux cheveux, blonds* 
Comme une moisson d'aout, si longs 
Qu'ils lui tombaient jusqu'au talons. 

" Elle avait une voix etrange, 
Musicale, de fee ou d'ange, 
Des yeux verts sous leur noire frange." 

Here the bow moved caressingly upwards and a plaint- 
ively wild tune that seemed born of high mountains and 
dense forests floated softly through the room. And above 
k, the player's voice still rose and fell — 

" Lui, ne craignait pas de rival, 
Quand il traversait mont ou val. 
En I'emportant sur son cheval. 

"Car, pour tous ceux de lacontree 
Alti^re elle s'etait montree 
Jusqu'au jour qu'li I'eut recontree." 

The music changed to a shuddering minor key, and a 
sobbing wail broke from the strings. 

" L' amour la prit si fort au coeur, 
Que pour un sourire moqueur, 
II lui vint un mal de langueur. 

♦This exquisite poem, entitled " L'Archet," here quoted in full» 
was written by one Charles Cros, a French poet, whose distinctly 
great abilities were never encouraged or recognized in his lifetime. 
Young still and full of promise, he died quite recently in Paris, sur- 
rounded by the very saddest circumstances of suffering, poverty, and 
neglect. The grass has scarcely had time to grow long or rank 
enough over his grave ; when it has, the critics of his country will 
possibly take up his book, " Le Coffret de Santal," and call the at- 
tention of France to his perished genius. At present he is only very 
alightly remembered by a set of playful verses, entitled " Le Hareng 
Saur," written merely for the amusement of children ; and yet the 
"Rendezvous" exists — a poem almost as beautiful and weird as 
Keats's " Belle dame sans Merci " — allowing for the difference of 
languages. 



g6 tVOKMWOOD, 

*Et dans ses demieres caresses: 
Fais un archet avec mes tresses. 
Pour charmer tes autres maitressesl 

** Puis, dans un long baiser nerveux 
Kile mourut 1 " 

And here we distinctly heard the solemn beat of a 
funeral march underlying the pathetic minor melody — 

" Suivant ses voeux 
II fit I'archet de ses cheveux 1 " 

There was a half pause, then all suddenly clamorous 
chords echoed upon our ears like the passionate exclama- 
tions of an almost incoherent despair. 

** Comme un aveugle qui marmonne, 
Sur un violon da Cremone 
II jouait, demandant I'aumone. 

** Tous avaient d'enivrants frissons, 
A I'ecouter. Car dans ces sons 
Vivaient la morte et ses chansons. 

"Leroi, charme, fit sa fortune. 
Lui, sut plaire a la reine brune. 
Et I'enlever au clair de lune. 

"Mais, chaque fois qu'il y touchait 
Pour plaire ^ la reine, I'archet 
Tristement le lui reprochait ! " 

Oh, the unutterable sadness, the wailing melancholy 
of that wandering wild tune! Tears filled Pauline's eyes, 
she clasped her little hands in her lap and looked at her 
cousin in awe and wonder; and I saw Guidel's color 
come and go with the excess of emotion the mingled 
music and poetry aroused in him for all his quiet de- 
meanor. He'loise continued — 

" Au son du funebre langage 
lis moururent a mi-voyage. 
Et la morte reprit son gage. 

* Elle reprit ses cheveux, blonds 
Comme une moisson d'aout, si longs 
Qu'ils lui tombaient jusqu'au talons 1 " 

A long-drawn sigh of sound, and all was still ! So 



WOI^MWOOD. 57 

deeply fascinated were we with this recitation and violin- 
music combined, that we sat silent as thougli under a 
spell, till we became gradually conscious that H^loise 
was surveying us with a slight smile, and a little more 
color in her cheeks than usual. Then we surrounded her 
with acclamations, Pauline moving up to her, and hiding 
her tear-wet eyes in her breast. 

" You are a genius, mademoiselle ! " said Silvion GuidH, 
bowing profoundly to her as he spoke. " Your gifts are 
heaven-born and marvellous ! " 

" That is true ! — that is true !" declared the good Cur^, 
coughing away a suspicious little huskiness of voice. " It 
is astonishing. I have never heard anything like it I It 
is enough to make a whole congregation of sinners 
weep ! " 

He'loise laughed. "Or else take to sinning afresh!" 
she said, with that slight touch of sarcasm which some- 
times distinguished her. " There is nothing in ' I'Archet,* 
mofi pere, to incline the refractory to penitence." 

" Perhaps not, perhaps not ! " — and M. Vaudron rubbed 
his nose very hard — " but it moves the heart, my child ; 
such poetry and such music move the heart to somethings 
that is evident. And the influence must be good ; it can- 
not possibly be bad ! " 

"That depends entirely on the temperament of the 
listener," replied Heloise quietly, as she put back her 
violin in its case, despite our entreaties that she would 
play something else. The servant had just brought in a 
tray of wine and biscuits, and she prepared to dispense 
these with her ordinary "practical-utility" manner, thus 
v/aiving aside any further conversation on her own musical 
talents. The Comte and Comtesse de Charmiiles were 
accepting with much pleased complacence my father's 
warm and admiring praise of their niece, — and presently 
the talk became general, exclusive of myself and Pauline, 
whom I had kept beside me in a little corner apart from 
the others, so that I might say my lingering good-night 
to her with all the tenderness and pride I felt in my new 
position as her accepted future husband. 

" I shall come and see you to-morrow," I whispered. 
" You will be glad, Pauline ? " 

She smiled. " Oh yes ! you will come every day now, 
I suppose ? " 



58 WORMWOOD. 

" Would it please you if I did ? " I asked. 

** Would it please you ? " she inquired, evading th^ 
question. 

Whereupon I launched forth once more into passionate 
protestations which she listened to with, as I fancied, the 
least little touch of weariness. I stopped short abruptly. 

"You are tired, J7ia cherie T^ I said tenderly. "I am 
sure you are tired ! " 

" Yes, I am," she confessed, smothering a little yawn, 
and giving a careless upward stretch of her lovely 
rounded arms, much to my secret admiration. " I think 
my cousin's music exhausted me ! Do you know " — and 
she turned her sweet blue eyes upon me with a wistful ex- 
pression — " it frightened me ! It must be terrible to love 
like that ! " 

" Like what ? " I asked playfully, rather amused by the 
tragic earnestness of her tone. 

She glanced up quickly, and, seeing that I smiled, gave 
a little petulant shrug of her shoulders. 

" Like the lady with the ' cheyeux si longs ^ qu'ils lui 
tombaie7it jusqit^au talons I ' " she answered. " But you 
laugh at me, so it does not matter ! " 

"It was all a fable, ma mie P^ I said coaxingly. "It 
should affect you no more than a fairy-tale ! " 

" Yet there may be a soup^on of truth even in fables ! " 
she said, with that sudden seriousness which I had once 
or twice before remarked in her. " But tell me, Gaston, 
— remember you promised to tell me ! — what do you think 
of M. Silvion Guidel ? " 

I looked across the room to where he stood, not drink- 
ing wine as the others were doing, but leaning slightly 
against the mantelpiece, conversing with the Comtesse de 
Charmilles. 

"He is very handsome!" I admitted. "Too hand- 
some for a man — he should have been a woman." 

" And clever .? " persisted Pauline. " Do you think he 
is clever ? " 

" There can be no doubt of that ! " I answered curtly. 
" I fancy he will be rather out of his element as a priest." 

"Oh, but he \s good /^^ said my J/a/idd earnestly, open- 
ing her l;l'ae eyes very v.iuv. 

" So lie Vi\2y be ! " 1 lar.^^hcd ; " but all good incn need 
not become piicsLsl Jar e^cciiijl:^ you would nc;t call ml 



IVOKMWOOD. 59 

very bad ; but I am not going to be such a fool as to take 
the vow of celibacy — I am going to m^xry you" 

"And you imagine that will be very fortunate ?" she 
said, with a bright saucy smile. 

" The only fortune I desire 1 " I replied, kissing her 
hand. 

She blushed prettily, then rising, moved away towards 
where the rest of the party stood, and joined in their con- 
versation. I followed her example, and after a little more 
chat, the last good-nights were said, and we — that is, my- 
self and my father, the Cur^ and his nephew — took our 
leave. We all four walked part of the way home to- 
gether, the talk between us turning for the most part on 
the interesting subject of my engagement to Pauline, and 
many were the congratulations showered upon me by 
good old Vaudron, who earnestly expressed the hope that 
it might be his proud privilege to perform for us the 
Church ceremony of marriage. My father was in high 
spirits ; such a match was precisely what he had always 
wished for me. He was a rank Republican, and with the 
usual Republican tendency, had a great weakness for un- 
blemished aristocratic lineage, such as the De Charmilles 
undoubtedly possessed. Silvion Guidel was the most 
silent of us all, — he walked beside me, and seemed so ab- 
sorbed in his own reflections that he started as though 
from a dream, when, at a particular turning in the road, 
we stopped to part company. 

" I hope I shall see more of you, M. Gaston," he then 
said, suddenly proffering me his slim delicate-looking 
hand. " I have had very few friends of my own age ; I 
trust I may claim you as one ? " 

" Why, of course you may ! " interposed my father 
cheerily, " though Gaston is not very religious, I fear ! 
Still he is a genial lad, though I say it that should not ; 
he will show you some of the fine sights of Paris, and 
make the time spin by pleasantly. Come and see us 
whenever you like ; your uncle knows that my house is as 
free to him as his own." 

With these and various other friendly expressions we 
went each on our several ways ; the Cure and his nephew 
going to the left, my father and I continuing the road 
straight onwards. We lit our cigars and walked for some 
minutes without speaking, then my father broke silence. 



66 WORMIVOOD. 

" A remarkably handsome fellow, that GuidM ! " he 
said. " Dangerously so, for a priest ! It is fortunate 
that his lady-penitents will not be able to see him very 
distinctly through the confessional-gratings, else who 
knows what might happen ! He has a wonderful gift of 
eloquence too ; dost thou like him, Gaston ? " 

" No I " I replied frankly, and at once, " I cannot say I 
do!" 

My father looked surprised 

" But why ? " 

"Impossible to tell, mo7i pere. He is fascinating, he is 
agreeable, he is brilliant ; but there is something in him 
that I mistrust ! " 

" Tut-tut ! " and my father took my arm good-humor-, 
edly. " Now thou art an engaged man, Gaston, thou 
must put thy prejudices in thy pocket. Thou art too 
much like me in thy chronic suspicion of all priestcraft, 
Remember, this beautiful youth is not a priest yet, and I 
would not mind wagering that he never will be." 

" If he has been :.ained for the priesthood, what else 
is he fit for ? " I asked rather irritably. 

" What else ? He is fit for anything, w<?;2 choux ! A 
diplomat, a statesman, a writer of astonishing books. 
He hdiS gejiius ; and genius is like the Greek Proteus, it 
can take all manner of forms and be great in any one of 
them! Aye!" and my father nodded his head saga- 
ciously. " Take my word for it, Gaston, there is some- 
thing in this young man Guide! that is altogether excep- 
tional and remarkable ; he is one of the world's inspired 
dreamers, and to my notion he is more likely to aid in 
overturning priestcraft, than to place himself in its ranks 
as a bulwark of defense." 

I murmured sometliing unintelligible by way of reply : 
my father's praise of the Breton stranger was not so very 
pleasing to me that I should wish to encourage him in its 
continuance. We soon reached our own door, and, bid- 
ding each other good-night, retired at once to rest. But 
all tlirough my sleep I was haunted by fragments of the 
violin music played by Hdloise St. Cyr, and scraps of the 
verses she had recited. At one time, between midnight 
and morning, I dreamt I saw her standing in my room, 
robed in a white shroudlike garment; she fixed her eyes 
9n mine, and, as I looked, her lips parted, and she said,^ 



WOKMWOOD, 6l 

I 

*^ EHe vwurf^t /^^ and I thought she meant that Pauline 
was dead. Struggling to escape from tlie horror of this 
impression, I cried, " No, no ! she lives ! She is mine ! " 
and, making a violent effort, I fancied I had awakened, 
when lo ! the curtain at my window seemed to move 
slowly and stealthily back, and the beautiful calm face of 
Silvion Guidbl stared full at me, pallidly illumined by the 
moon. Again I started, and cried out, and this time 
awoke myself thoroughly. I sprang out of bed, and 
dashed back the window-draperies ; I threw open the 
closed shutters ; the night was one of sparkling frosty 
splendor, the stars twinkled in their glorious millions 
above my head ; there was not a sound anywhere, not a 
living soul to be seen! I returned to my tossed and 
tumbled couch, with a smile at my own absurd visionary 
fancies, and in my heart blaming Heloise St. Cyr and her 
weird violin for having conjured them up in my usually 
clear and evenly-balanced brain. 



6a WOKMWOOD. 



VII. 

On the far horizon of my line of life there shines a 
waving, ever-diminishing gleam of brightness ; I know 
it to be the hazy reflection of my bygone glad days and 
sweet memories, and v/hen I shut my eyes close and 
send my thoughts backward, I am almost able to count 
those little dazzling points of sunshine sparkling through 
the gloom that now encompasses my soul. But though 
brilliant they were brief — brief as the few stray flashes of 
lightning that cross the skies on a hot summer's evening. 
My inward vision aches to look at them ! let them be 
swallowed up in blackness, I say, and let me never more 
remember that once I was happy ! For remembrance is 
very bitter, and very useless as well ; to play out one's 
part bravely in the world, I have said one should have no 
conscience ; but it is far more necessary to have no 
memory ! Are there any poor souls wearing on forlornly 
towards the grave and monotonously performing the 
daily routine of life without either heart or zest in living? 
Let such look back to the time when the world first 
opened out before their inexperienced gaze like a brilliant 
arena of fair fortune wherein they fancied they might win 
the chiefest prize, and then they will understand the 
meaning of spiritual torture ! Then will the mind be 
stretched on a wrenching rack of thought ! then will the 
futile tears fill the tired eyes, then will the passionate 
craving for death become more and more clamorous — 
death and utter, blessed forgetfulness ! Ah ! if one could 
only be sure that we do forget when we die ! but that is 
just what I, for one, cannot count upon. The uncer- 
tainty fills me with horror ! I dare not allow myself to 
dwell upon the idea that perhaps I may sink drowningly 
from the dull shores of life into a tideless ocean of 
eternal remembrance ! I dare not, else I should indeed 
be mad, more mad than I am now I For even now I am 



wo KM WOOD. 63 

haunted by faces I would fain forget, by voices, by plead- 
ing eyes, by praying hands ; and anon, by stark rigid 
forms, dead and white as marble, with the awful frozen 
smile of death's unutterable secret carved on their stiff 
set lips. And yet they are but the phantoms of my own 
drugged brain ; I ought to know that by this time ! Let 
me strive to banish them ; let me lose sight of them for a 
little, while I try to knot together the broken threads of 
my torn Past. 

During the two or three months immediately following 
my betrothal to Pauline de Charmilles, I think 1 must 
have been the proudest, most contented, perfectly light- 
hearted man in France. No cloud marred my joy; no 
bitterness nauseated my cup of felicity. AH things 
smiled upon me, and in the warm expansion of my nature 
I had at last even admitted Silvion Guidel to a share in 
my affections. Truth to tell, it was difficult to resist him ; 
his frank friendliness of behavior towards me made me 
feel ashamed of my former captiousness and instinctive 
dislike of him, and by degrees we became as close inti- 
mates as it was possible for two young men to be who were 
following such widely different professions. He was a 
great favorite with the De Charmilles, and was frequently 
invited to their house, though I was of course the more 
constant visitor, and when, after spending the evening 
there, we took our leave, we always walked part of the 
way home together. I was particularly pleased with the 
extreme deference and almost fastidious reserve of his 
manner to Pauline ; he seemed rather to avoid her 
than otherwise, and to consider the fact of her engage- 
ment to me as a sort of title to command his greater re- 
spect. He was not half so constrained with He'loise St. 
Cyr ; he talked to her freely, led her into arguments on 
literature and music, in which I was often astonished to 
observe how brilliantly she shone, lent her rare old books 
now and then, and wrote down for her from memory frag- 
ments of old Breton songs and ballads, airs which she 
afterwards rendered on her violin with surpassing pathos 
and skill. One touching little unrhymed ditty, which she 
recited to her own improvised accompaniment, I re- 
member was called '' Le Pauvre Clerc," and ran as fol- 
Iqws : — 



64 WORMWOOD. 

" J'ai perdu mes sabots et dechire mes pauvres pieds, 

A suivre ma douce dans les champs, dans les boisj 
I La pluie, le gresil, et la glace, 

Ne sont point un obstacle a I'amour 1 

** Ma douce est jeune comma moi, 
Elle n'a pas encore vingt ans ; 

Elle est fraiche et jolie 
Ses regards sont pleins de feu 1 

Ses paroles charmantes ! 
Elle est une prison 

Oil j'ai enferme mon coeur! 

* Je ne saurais ^ quoi la comparer; 
Sera-ce ^ la petite rose blanche qu'on appelle Rose-Marie t 
Petite perle des jeunes filles; 
Fleur de lis entre les fleurs ; 
Elle s'ouvre aujourd'hui, et elle se fermera demain. 

**En vous faisant la cour, ma douce, j'ai ressemble 
Au rossignol perche sur le rameau d'aubepine ; 
Quand il veut s'endormir, les epines le piquent, alors 
II s'eleve a la cime de I'arbre et se met a chanter 1 

** Mon etoile est fatale, 

Mon etat est contre nature, 
Je n'ai eu dans ce monde 

Que des peines k endurer, 
Je suis comme une ame dans les flammes du purgatoire. 
Nul Chretien sur la terre qui me veuille du bien I 

•* II n'y a personne qui ait eu autant a souffrir 
A votre sujetque moi depuis ma naissance ; 
Aussi je vous supplie a deux genoux 
Et au nom de Dieu d'avoir pitie de votre clerc I '* 

It was exceedingly simple and yet peculiarly mournful, 
BO much so, that the first time we heard Heioise's render- 
ing of it, I saw, somewhat to my concern, big tears well- 
ing up in my pretty Pauline's eyes and falling one by one 
on her clasped hands. Guid^l was standing near her at 
the time, and he tgo seemed sincerely troubled by her 
emotion. Bending towards her, he said, with a faint 
smile — 

" Are you crying for * le pauvre clerc,' mademoiselle ? 
Surely he is not worth such tears ! " 

I smiled also, and took my betrothed's unresisting 
hand tenderly in my own. 

*' Sbe is very sensitive," I said gently. " She is a little 
angel-harp that responds sympathetically to everything." 



WOKMWOOD. 65 

But here Pauline hastily dried her eyes, pressed my 
hand, and went quietly away, and when she came back 
again, she was radiant and bright as ever. 

The Feast of Noel and the g?i.y Jour dc V An had been 
marked to Pauline by the very large number of valuable 
presents and floral souvenirs she received. All her 
friends knew she was '' fiancee," and countless congrat- 
ulations and "etrennes" were poured upon her. ]^ut she 
had grown either slightly hlasee or philosophical, for she 
evinced none of her former childlike delight at the big 
baskets and boxes of bonbons given to her ; even a goodly 
round hamper of gilded wicker-work, wreathed with vio- 
lets and packed close with her once adored *' marrons 
glac^es," failed to excite her to any great enthusiasm. 
On the morning of the Jour de VAn^ I had sent her a 
fancifully-designed osier gondola full of roses and a 
necklace of pearls ; and of all her gifts this had seemed 
to please her most, much to my delight. Silvion Guidel 
had contented himself with simply wishing her happiness 
in his usual serious and earnest fashion, and for the New 
Year he had offered her no token save a large and spot- 
less cluster of the lilies of St. John. She had shown me 
these, with rather a wistful look, so I fancied, and had 
asked me whether it would not be well to place them in a 
vase near the Virgin's statue in her own little private ora- 
tory ? I agreed ; I never attached importance to the girl- 
ishly romantic notions I knew she had on the subject of 
religion ; in fact, I thought with her, that such pure, 
white, sacred-looking blossoms were much more fitted for 
an altar than a drawing-room. And so she put them 
there, and I encouraged and approved the act — like a 
fool ! Those lilies were allowed to occupy the most 
honored place in her sleeping-chamber, — to send out 
their odors to mingle with every breath she drew — to 
instill their insidious message through her maiden 
dreams ! Ah God ! if I had only known ! 

With the passing of the worst part of winter, just 
towards the close of March, Heloise St. Cyr was sum- 
moned to see her mother, who was thought to be danger- 
ously ill. The night before she left for Normandy, I was 
spending a couple of hours at the De Charmilles' — there 
was no visitor that evening there but myself, and I was 
now accounted almost one of the family. I thought she 

5 



66 " WORMWOOD. 

looked very weary and anxious, but attributed this solely 
to the bad news she had received from her native home. 
I was therefore rather surprised, when, taking advantage 
of Pauline's absence from the room for a few moments, 
she came hurriedly up to me and sat down by my side. 

" I want to speak to you, Monsieur Gaston," she said, 
with an odd hestitation and fluttered nervousness of man- 
ner. " You cannot imagine how unhappy I am at being 
obliged to leave Pauline just now ! " 

"Indeed, I can quite understand it!" I replied 
quickly, for I entirely sympathized in such a grief, which 
to me would have been insupportable. " But let us hope 
you will not be absent long." 

" I hope not — I fervently hope not ! " she murmured, 
her voice trembling a little. " But, M. Gaston, you will 
not let Pauline be too much alone .'* You will visit her 
every day, and see her as often as possible .? " 

I smiled. " You may rely upon that ! " I answered. 
" Do not be afraid, Heloisre ! " — for I called her Heloise 
now, as the others did — " I am not likely to neglect her ! " 

" No, of course not ! " she said, in the same low nervous 
accents. " Yet, she is not quite herself just now, I fancy, 
a little morbid perhaps and unstrung. She often sheds 
tears for — for nothing, you know, and I think she gives 
way to too much religion. Oh, you laugh ! " for I had 
been unable to resist a smile at this suggestion of my 
little darling's excess of devotion. I knew the reason, I 
thought ! she was praying for me ! " But I do not think 
it is natural in one so young, and I would give anytlwig 
to be able to stay with her, and watch over her a little, 
instead of going to Normandy ! She used not to be so 
over-particular about her religious duties — and now she 
never misses early mass, she is up and out of doors while 
I am yet asleep, and she is quite cross if we try to keep 
her away from Benediction. And it is not necessary for 
her to attend M. Vaudron's church always^ do you think 
so ? " 

She looked full at me ; but I could perceive no under- 
drift of meaning in her words. To my mind everything 
Pauline did or chose to do was perfection. 

" She is fond of good old Vaudron," I replied ; " we 
are all fond of him, and if you ask me frankly, I think 
I would rather she went to his church than to any other. 



WOKMIVOOD. 67 

You are over-anxious, Hdloise — the news of your mother's 
illness has quite unstrung you. Don't be nervous ; 
Pauline is the idol of our hearts ; we shall all take extra 
care of her while you are absent." 

" I hope you wi/l take extra care ! " she said, with 
strange, almost passionate earnestness. " I pray to my 
God you will ! " 

Her words impressed me very unpleasantly for the 
moment ; what an uncomfortable creature she was I 
thought, with her great, flashing gray-green eyes, and pale 
classic features, on which the light of a burning inward 
genius sent a weird unearthly glow ! Just then Pauline 
came back, so she broke off her conversation with me 
abruptly, and on the following morning she had gone. 

Some few days after her departure I jestingly broached 
the subject of this "too much religion" to my young 
fiancee. 

" So you go to mass every morning, like a good little 
girl ? " I said merrily, twisting one of her rich brown curls 
round my finger as I spoke. 

She started. " How did you know that.-* " 

" Heloise told me, before she went away. Why, you 
don't mind my knowing it, do you ? It is very right of 
you and very proper ; but doesn't it make you get up too 
early ? " 

" No ; I never sleep much after daybreak," she an- 
swered, her face flushing a little. 

" Like the daisy, awake at sunrise !" I said laughingly. 
" Well, I must reform, and be good too. Shall I meet 
you at church to-morrow, for instance ? " 

" If you wish ! " she replied quietly. 

She was so very serious about it that I did not like to 
pursue the question further ; some of her parents' relig- 
ious scruples were no doubt her heritage, I thought, and 
I had no inclination to offend them by any undue levity. 
Religion is becoming to a woman : — a beautiful girl pray- 
ing is the only idea the world can give of what God's 
angels may be. The morrow came, and I did not go to 
church as I had intended, having overslept myself. But 
in the course of the day, I happened to meet M. Vau- 
dron, and to him I mentioned Pauline's regular attend- 
ance at his early mass. The good man's brow cloudedj 
and he looked exceedingly puzzled. 



68 WORMWOOD. 

"That is strange ! very strange ! " he remarked musingly, 
" I must be getting very short-sighted, or else the dear 
child must keep very much in the background of the 
church, for I never see her except on Sundays, when she 
comes with her father and mother. Early mass, you say ? 
There are several ; the first one is at six o'clock, when my 
nephew assists me as deacon ; the next at seven, when I 
have the usual attendant to help me officiate, for at that 
time Silvion goes for a long walk, he is accustomed to a 
great deal of exercise in Brittany, and he does not get 
enough of it here. It must be at seven that the pretty 
one slips in to pray; she would hardly come earlier. Ah 
well ; it is easy for my old eyes to miss her then, for my 
sacred duties take up all my attention. She is a good 
child, a sweet and virtuous one ; thou shouldst be very 
proud of her, Gaston ! " 

" And am I not so ? " I responded laughingly. " I 
should love her and be proud of her, even — do not be 
shocked, monpere! — even if she never went to mass at all ! " 

He shook his head with much pious severity at this au- 
dacious declaration, but could not quite repress a kindly 
smile all the same ; then we shook hands cordially and 
parted. 

The next day I did manage to rouse myself in time for the 
seven o'clock mass, and I arrived at the little church in a 
pleasurable state of excitement, thinking what a surprise 
my appearance would be to Pauline. To my intense dis- 
appointment, however, she was not there ! There were 
very few people present, two or three market-women and 
an old widow in the deepest mourning being the most 
conspicuous members of the congregation. Immediately 
after the Elevation of the Host, I slipped out, and, hurry- 
ing home, wrote a little note to my truant betrothed, tell- 
ing her how I had been to mass hoping to meet her, and 
how I had missed her after all. Later in the day I called 
to see her, and found her in one of her radiant laughing 
moods. 

^'- Fauvre gar^on I^^ she playfully exclaimed, throwing 
her arms about me. " What a dreadful thing for thee to 
have risen so early, all for nothing ! I did not go to 
church at all ; I stayed in bed, for I was sleepy ; in fact, I 
am getting very lazy again, and once lazy, helas 1 1 shall 
cease to be religious ! " 



WORMli^OOD. 60 

She sighed, and assumed a demurely penitent air ; I 
laughed, and kissed her, and soon, in the charm of her 
conversation and the fascination of her company, forgot 
my Httle disappointment of the morning. When I left 
her, I was convinced that her fancy for attending early 
mass regularly had passed, like all the passing fancies of 
a very young imaginative girl, and I thought no more 
about the matter. 

Just about this time my father was suddenly compelled 
to go to London on business connected with certain large 
financial speculations, in which our firm was concerned, 
both for ourselves and others. He calculated on being 
absent about a fortnight or three weeks, with the natural 
and inevitable result, that, while he was away, all the work of 
superintending our Paris banking-house fell entirely on my 
hands. I was busy from morning until night ; I had in- 
deed so little leisure of my own, that I could seldom 
spare more than the Sunday afternoon and evening for the 
uninterrupted enjoyment of Pauline's society. I had such 
rare and brief glimpses of her that I was quite restless 
and wretched about it ; the more so, as Heloise St. Cyr's 
parting words often recurred to me with uncomfortable per- 
sistency ; but nevertheless, my work had to be done, and, 
after all, each time I did visit my beautiful betrothed, I 
found her in such blithe, almost wild spirits, and always 
looking so lovely and brilliant, that I blamed myself for 
giving way to any anxiety on her behalf. Besides, we 
were to be married at the beginning of June, and it was 
now close on the end of April. The Comtesse de Char- 
milles was pleasantly occupied with the ordering and pre- 
paring of the marriage trousseaux, and a few stray wed- 
ding-gifts had already arrived. I was mounting securely 
upwards to the very summit of joy, so I thought ! I little 
imagined I was on the brink of ruin ! 

During this period I saw a great deal of Silvion 
Guidel. He used to call for me at our bank of an after- 
noon and walk home with me, and as I was rather lonely 
in the big old house at Neuilly, now that my father was 
absent, he would give me many an occasional hour of his 
company, talking on various subjects such as he knew 
were interesting to my particular turn of mind. He had 
the most vivid and intellectual comprehension of art, 
science, and literature, and his conversation had always 



7© WORMWOOD. 

that brilliancy and point which makes spoken language 
almost as fascinating as the neatly turned and witty 
phrases written by some author, whose style is his chief 
charm. And sometimes, when I was obliged to turn to 
my work and absorb myself in hard and dry calculations, 
Guid^l would still remain with me, quite silent, sitting in 
a chair near the window, his head leaning back, and his 
eyes fixed dreamily on the delicate spring-time leafage 
of the trees outside. I would often glance up and see 
him thus, gravely engrossed in his own thoughts, with 
that serious musing smile on his lips, that was like the 
smile of some youthful poet who contemplates how to 
evolve 

" Beautiful things made new 
For the delight of the sky-children ! " * 

And, worst confession of all, I think, that I have to 
make, I learnt to love him ! I — even I ! A peculiar 
sense of revering tenderness stirred me whenever he, 
with his beautiful calm face and saintly expression, came 
into the room where I sat alone, fagged out with the 
day's labor, and laying his two hands affectionately on 
my shoulders, said — 

" Still working hard, Beauvais ! What a thing it is to 
be so absolutely conscientious ! Rest, mon ami I rest a 
little, if not for your own sake, then for the sake of your 
idJix Jtancee, who will grieve to see you over-wearied ! " 

I used to feel quite touched by such friendly solicitude 
on his part, and not only touched, but grateful as well, 
for the ready manner in which he seemed at once to 
comprehend and enter into my feelings. I was a sen- 
sitive sort of fellow in those days, quick to respond to 
kindness and equally quick to resent injustice. But it 
was I who had been unjust in the case of Silvion Guid^l, 
I thought ; I had disliked him at first without any cause, 
and now I frequently reproached myself for this, and 
wondered how I could ever have been so unreasonable ! 
Yet, though first impressions are sometimes erroneous, 1 
believe there is a balance in favor of their correctness. 
If a singular antipathy seizes you for a particular person 
at first sight, no matter how foolish it may seem, you may 
be almost sure that there is something in your two 

* Keats. 



WORMWOOD. 71 

natures that is destined to remain in constant opposition. 
You may conquer it for a time, it may even change, 
as it did in my case, to profound affection ; but, sooner 
or later, it will spring up again with tenfold strength and 
deadliness; the reason of your first aversion will be made 
painfully manifest, and the end of it all will be doubly 
bitter because of the love that for a brief while sweetened 
it. I say I loved Silvion Guidc^l ! and in proportion to 
the sincerity of that love, 1 afterwards measured the 
intensity of my hate 1 



j2 IVORMIVOOD. 



VIII. 

A BRILLIANT May had begun in Paris, the foliage was 
all in its young beauty of pale-green sprouting leaf, the 
Champs Elysees were bright with flowers, and the gay 
city looked its loveliest. My father was still delayed by 
his affairs in England ; but I knew he would not remain 
away much longer now, as he was good-naturedly anxious 
to relieve me of some of the more onerous cares of busi- 
ness before the time for my marriage came too close at 
hand. Heloise St. Cyr was also expected back daily ; 
her mother had recovered, and she had, therefore, 
nothing to detain her any longer in Normandy. Pauline 
told me this news, and I noticed that she did not seem 
at all over-enthusiastic concerning her cousin's return. 
Like a fool, I flattered myself that this was because / 
had now become the first in her affections, and that, as a 
perfectly natural consequence, the once-adored Heloise 
was bound to occupy a lower and vastly inferior place. 
I was full of my own joy, my own triumph, and I was 
blind to anything else but these. True, I did remark on 
one or two occasions, during my visits to her, that my 
fiancee was sometimes not quite so brilliant as usual ; 
that there was a certain transparency and ethereal del- 
icacy about her features that was suggestive of hidden 
suffering ; that her deep blue eyes seemed larger than 
they used to be — larger, darker, and more intense in 
their wistfulness of expression ; that now and then her 
lips quivered pathetically when I kissed her, and that 
there were moments when she appeared to be on the 
verge of tears. But I attributed all these signs of sub- 
dued emotion to the nervous excitement a young girl 
would naturally feel at the swift hourly approach of her 
marriage-day. I knew she was exceedingly sensitive, 
and for this reason I rather looked forward to the return 
of Hdloise, as 1 felt certain that she, with her womanly 



WORMIVOOD. 73 

tact, quiet ways, and strong tenderness for Pauline 
would, by her very presence in the house, do much to 
soothe my little betrothed's highly-strung and over- 
wrought condition, and would also take a great deal of 
the fatigue of preparation for the wedding off her hands. 
Still, 1 did not really think very deeply about it any 
way, and I was rather taken by surprise one afternoon, 
when, on calling to leave some flowers for Pauline en 
passant, the servant begged me to enter and wait in the 
drawing-room for a few minutes, as the Comtesse de 
Charmilles had expressed a particular wish to see me 
alone on a matter of importance. I crossed the familiar 
threshold I remember that day with a strange dull sen- 
sation at my heart ; and as the doors of the great salon 
were thrown open for me, a shiver seized me as though it 
were winter instead of spring. The room looked bare 
and blank in spite of its rich furniture and adornment. 
No Pauline came tripping in to greet me, and I stood, 
hat in hand, leaning against the edge of the grand piano, 
gazing blankly through the window and wondering fool- 
ishly to myself why the gardener, usually so neat, had left 
a heap of the past winter's dead leaves in one corner of 
the outside gravel-path ! There they were, an ugly brown 
pile of them ; and every now and then the light May 
wind fluttered them, blowing two or three off to whirl like 
dark blots against the clear blue sky. I was still monot- 
onously meditating on this trifle, and comparing those 
swept-up emblems of decay with the clustre of rich dewy 
red roses I had just brought for my fiancee, and which I 
had laid carefully down on a side table near me, when 
the door was opened softly and closed again with equal 
care, and the Comtesse de Charmilles approached. She 
looked worn and anxious, and there was a puzzled pain 
and sorrow in her eyes that filled me with alarm. I 
caught my breath. 

" Pauline — is she ill 1 " I faltered, dreading I knew 
not what. 

" She is not well," began the Comtesse gently, then 
paused. 

My heart beat violently. 

"It is something dangerous ? You have sent for a 

physician 1 You " Here my attempted self-control 

gave way, and I exclaimed, " Let me see her 1 I must — 



74 



WORMWOOD. 



I will ! Madame, I have the right to see her ! Why do 

you hinder me ? " 

The Comtesse laid her hand on my arm in a pacifying 
manner, and smiled a little forcedly. 

" Be tranquil, Gaston. There is nothing serious the 
matter. To-day, it is true, she is not well ; she has been 
weeping violently, pauvre enfant ! — such tears ! " — and 
the mother's voice quivered slightly as she spoke — " I 
have asked her a hundred times the cause of her distress, 
and she assures me it is nothing — always nothing. But I 
think there must be some reason ; she, who is generally 
so bright and happy, would scarcely weep so long and 
piteously without cause, — and this is why I wished to 
speak to you, monfils^ — to ask you, — is the love between 
you both as great as ever ? " 

I stared at her amazed. What a silly woman she was, 
I thought, to make such an odd and altogether un- 
necessary inquiry ! 

" Most assuredly it is, madame ! " I replied, with em- 
phatic earnestness. " It is even greater on my part, and 
of her tenderness I have never had a moment's occasion 
to doubt. That she sheds tears at all is of itself dis- 
tressing news to me, — but nevertheless, it is true that 
girls will often weep for nothing, especially when they are 
a little over-strung and unduly excited, as Pauline may be 
at the present time. She probably reflects, with a very 
natural regret, for which I should be the last to blame 
her, — that very soon she will have to leave home 
and your fostering care ; — the change from girlhood to 
marriage is a very serious one, — and being sensitive, 
she has perhaps thought more deeply about it than we 
imagine " — here I paused, embarrassed and concerned, 
for 1 saw two big drops roll slowly down the mother's 
cheeks, and glisten in the folds of her rich silk robe. 

" Yes, it may be that," — she said, in low tremulous 
accents. " 1 have thought so myself ; — yet every now 
and then I have had the idea — a very foolish one no 
doubt, — that perhaps the child is secretly unhappy ! But 
if you assure me that all is well between you, then I must 
be mistaken. Pardon my anxiety ! " and she extended 
her hand, which I took and kissed respectfully — " we 
have all had too much to do, I fancy, while our dear 
Hdloise has been away, and " — here she smiled more 



WORMWOOD. 



75 



readily — " it is possible we are all morbid in consequence ! 
At any rate, next time you are alone with Pauline, will 
you ask her to confide in you, if indeed there is anything 
vexing her usually sweet and serene nature ? Some mere 
trifle may have put her out, — a trifle exaggerated by her 
fancy, which we, knowing of, may be able to set right in- 
stantly — and surely that would be well ! " 

The generally dignified and rather austere looking lady 
was quite softened into plaintiveness by her eager and 
tender maternal solicitude, and I admired her for it. 
Kissing her hand again, I promised to do as she asked. 

" But cannot I see Pauline to-day } " I inquired. 

" No, Gaston, — it is better not ! " she answered. " The 
poor little thing is quite worn out with crying, — she is 
exhausted, and is now upon her bed asleep. I will give 
her those roses when she wakes, — they are for her, are 
they not.?" 

I assented eagerly, and brought them to her, — she took 
them and bade me " au revoir ! " 

" To-morrow come and see Pauline," she said. " I will 
tell her to expect thee. We will prepare a pretty * the k 
I'Anglaise ' in the little morning-room, — and thou wilt be 
able to discover the cause of her trouble." 

"If there is any trouble ! " I rejoined, half-smiling. 

"True ! If there is / If there is not, then thou must 
tell her she is a foolish little girl, and frightens us all 
without reason. A demain ! " 

Carefully carrying the roses I had brought, she left the 
room with a kindly nod of farewell, — and I went home to 
get through some work I was bound to finish before the 
next morning. I found Silvion Guidel awaiting me, and 
I hailed his presence with a sense of relief, for my own 
thoughts harassed me ; and, just to unburden my mind, 
I told him all about Pauline and her tears. He moved 
away to the window while I was speaking — we were in my 
father's library — and looked out at the trees in front of 
the house. As he had deliberately turned his back to 
me, I took his action as a sign of indifference. 

" Are you listening t " I asked, with some testiness. 

*' Listening t With both ears and with the very spirit 
of attention ! " he replied, changing his attitude abruptly 
and confronting me. " What the devil would you have 
me do ? '* 



^6 WORMWOOD. 

I almost bounced out of my chair, so startled was I at 
this sort of language from his lips ! Meeting my sur- 
prised gaze, he laughed aloud, — a ringing laugh which, 
though clear, seemed to me to have a touch of wildness 
in it. 

" Don't look so thunderstruck, Beauvais ! I said, * the 
(jevil ' ! — and why should I 7tot say it ? The devil is as 
important a personage as the Creator in our perpetual 
Divina Commedia. The world, the flesh, and the devil ! 
Three good things, Beauvais ! — three positively existent 
tempting things ! — no chimeras ! — three fightable enemies 
that we have to wrestle with and grapple at the throats of 
till we get them down under our feet and kill them ! — 
aye, even if we kill ourselves in the struggle ! The 
world, the flesh, and the devil ! Mo7i Dieu I I wonder 
which is the strongest of the three ! " 

I could not answer him for a moment, I was so com- 
pletely taken aback by his strange manner. The soft 
gray light of the deepening dusk fell on his face, min- 
gling with the warmer glow of the shaded lamp above our 
heads, — and I saw to my wonder and concern that he 
looked as if he were undergoing some poignant physical 
sufferings, — that there were dark lines under his eyes, — 
and that there was a preternaturally brilliant flush on 
his cheeks which seemed to me to denote fever. 

*' Do you know, Guidel, you are talking very oddly ? " 
I said at last, watching him narrowly. " You are not 
yourself at all ! What's the matter ? Are you ill ? " 

" 111 1 Ma foi ! — not 1 ! I am well, vion ami^ — well, 
and in astonishingly cheerful spirits! Don't you see 
that I am ? Don't you see that I am almost too merry 
for — for 7k priest 'i Listen, Beauvais!" — and, approach- 
ing me, he laid his two hands on my shoulders, — such 
burning hands ! — I felt more than ever certain that he 
must be going to have some feverish malady — " I have a 
secret ! — and I will confide it to you ! It is this, — Paris 
IS making a fool of me ! I have got the city's madness 
mto my veins ! — I am learning to love light and color 
and gay music and song and dance, — and the wildly 
beautiful eyes of women ! — eyes that are blue and 
passionate and pleading and that make one's heart ache 
for unuttered and unutterable joys ! You stare at me 
amazed ! — but is there anything so wonderful in the fact 



WORMIVOOD. 'j'j 

that T, — young, strong, and full of life — should all at once 
feel myself turning renegade to the vocation I have been 
trained to adopt? Do you know — can you imagine, 
Beauvais, what it is to be a priest ? — to meditate on 
things that human sight can never see, and human ears 
never hear, — to shut oneself out utterly from the sweet 
ways of the less devout existence, — to consecrate one's 
entire body and soul to a vast Invisible that never 
speaks, that never answers, that gives no sign of either 
refusal or acquiescence to the most passionate prayers, to 
resign a thousand actual joys for the far-off dream of 
heaven, — to sternly put away the touch of loving lips, the 
clasp of loving hands, — to cut all natural affections down 
at one blow, as a reaper cuts a sheaf of corn, — to 
become a human tomb for one's own buried soul, — to die 
to the world and to live for God ! But, — the world is 
here, Beauvais ! — and God is — Where ? " 

His words touched me most profoundly, — I understood 
-—or I thought I understood — his condition of mind, and 
I certainly could not deem it unnatural. A man such as 
he was, not only in the early prime of life, but gifted with 
rare intellectual ability, far above the ordinary calibre, 
needs must wake up at one time or another to the fact 
that the vocation of priest was at its best but a mel- 
ancholy and limited career. So this was what troubled 
him ! — this was the chagrin that secretly fretted his soul, 
and gave this touch of wildness to his behavior ! I 
hastened to sympathize with him; — and, taking his hajids 
from my shoulders, pressed them cordially in my own. 

" Mojt cher, if these are your real feelings on the sub- 
ject " — I said earnestly — " why not make a frank con- 
fession of them, not only to me, but to everybody con- 
cerned? Your uncle, for instance, is far too sensible and 
broad-minded a man to wish to persuade you into the 
Church against your true inclinations, — and if Paris has, 
as you say, worked a change in you, depend upon it, it is 
all for the best ! You are destined for greater things 
than the preaching of old doctrines to people, who, in 
these days of advanced thought, will, no matter how 
eloquent you are, never believe half of what you say. 
Shake off your shackles, Guidel, and be a free man ; — 
shape your own future ! — with such splendid capabilities 
as yours, it needs must be a fair and prosperous one 1 '' 



^8 WORMWOOD. 

He looked at me steadily and smiled. 

" You are very kind, Beauvais ! " he said softly — " as 
kind and good a fellow as ever I have met ! I wish — I 
wish to God I had your cleanness of conscience ! " 

I was a little puzzled at this remark. Had he been 
Srequenting low company, and disporting himself with the 
painted harridans in the common dancing-saloons of 
Paris ? — and was he tormenting himself with scruples born 
of his strict education and religious discipline ? What- 
ever the reason, it was evident he was very ill at ease. 
Suddenly, as though making a resolved end of his mental 
perplexity, he exclaimed — 

" Bah ! what nonsense I have been talking ! It is a 
foolish frenzy that has seized me, Beauvais, — nothing 
more ! I must be a priest ! — I look it, so people say ; 
— my mother has set her heart upon it, — my father stakes 
his eternal welfare on my sanctification ! — the prior of 
St. Xavier's at Rennes has written of me to the Holy 
Father as one of the most promising scions of the Church ; 
— all this preparation must not go for naught, mon ami! 
If I know myself to be a whited sepulchre, what then ? 
There are many like me, — what should I do with a 
conscience ? " 

These words pained me infinitely. 

" Guidel, you are indeed much changed ! " I said, 
rather reproachfully — " I cannot bear to hear you talk in 
this reckless fashion ! Priest or no priest, be faithful to 
whatever principles you finally take up. If you can 
believe in nothing, why, then, believe in nothing stead- 
fastly to the end, — if, on the contrary, you elect to fasten 
your faith to somethings then win the respect of every one 
as our good Pere Vaudron does, by clinging to that some- 
thing till death relaxes your hold of it. No matter 
what a man does, he should at least be consistent. If 
you feel you cannot conscientiously fulfil the calling of a 
priest, you ought to die rather than become one ! " 

*' Tiens r^ he murmured, — he had thrown himself back 
in a chair and closed his eyes — " that is easy ! " 

His voice had a touch of deep pathos in it, and my 
heart ached for him. There could be no doubt that he 
was suffering greatly, — some acute unhappiness had him 
on the rack, — and perhaps he did not tell me all, or even 
half his griefs. I drew up my own chair to the table, 



JVOKMIVOOD. 79 

where it «arge bundle of financial reports awaited my 
attention, — I 1l;as quite accustomed to have him often 
sitting in the same room with me while I worked, so that 
his presence did not disturb me in the least, — and I paid 
no heed to him for several minutes. All at once, though 
my head was bent down over my writing, 1 became 
instinctively aware that he was looking intently at me, — 
and, lifting my gaze to meet his, was exceedingly sorry 
to see what a strange expression of positive agony there 
was in his beautiful dark eyes, — eyes that were formerly 
so serene and untroubled as to be almost angelic. I laid 
down my pen and surveyed him anxiously. 

" Silvion, j7io?i ajui,''^ I said gently — "there is something 
else on your mind, more than this feeling about the 
priesthood. You have not told me everything ! " 

He fi owned. " What else should there be to tell ! " he 
answered, with a certain quick bfjisquerie, — then in milder 
accents he added — " My dear Beauvais, don't you know a 
man may have a thousand infinitesimal worries all mingled 
together in such confusion that he may be absolutely un- 
able to dissever or distinguish them separately 1 That is 
my case ! I cannot tell you plainly what is the matter 
with me, — for I hardly know myself." 

" Miserable for nothing, then ! " I laughed, scribbling 
away again. " Just like my little Pauline ! It must be in 
the air, this malady ! " 

There was a pause, during which the clock seemed to 
tick with an almost aggressive loudness. Then Guidel 
spoke. 

" Is she indeed miserable, do you think 1 " he asked, in 
accents so hoarse and tremulous that I scarcely recognized 
them as his. " She, that bright child of joy ? — the little 
* Sainte Vierge ' as I have sometimes called her .? — Oh, 
my Godf' 

This last exclamation broke from him like a groan of 
actual physical torture, and seeing him cover his face 
with his hands, I sprang to his side in haste and alarm. 

" Guidel, you are ill 1 I know you are ! You must 
either stay here the night with me, or let me walk home 
with you, — you are not fit to be alone ! " 

He drew away his hands from his eyes, and looked at 
me very strangely. 

" You are right, Beauvais ! I am not fit to be alone ! 



8o ' WORMWOOD. 

Only the straight-minded and pure of heart are fit for soli- 
tude, — there being 7io solitude anywhere ! ' No solitude ! 
— for every inch of space is occupied by some eyed germ 
of life, — and none can tell how or by whom our most 
secret deeds are watched and chronicled ! To be alone, 
simply means to be confronted with God's invisible, silent 
cloud of witnesses, — and you say truly, Beauvais, I am not 
fit t/ms to be alone ! " He rose from his chair and stood 
up, resting one hand on my arm. " All the same " — he 
continued, forcing a faint smile — " I will not bore you 
any longer with my present dismal humor ! Do not be- 
stow another thought on me, mon ami^ — I am going ! No ! 
— positively I cannot allow you to come home with me ; — 
I am not ill, Beauvais, I assure you ! — I am only miserable. 
The malady of misery may be, as you say, '■ in the air ! ' " 
He laughed drearily, and I watched him with increasing 
concern and wonder. " Really I do believe there are 
strange influences in the air sometimes ; like seeds of 
plants blown by the wind to places where they may best 
take root and fructify, so the unseen yet living organic in- 
fusions of hatred — or love, — joy or sorrow, may be, for all 
we know, broadcast in the seemingly clear ether, ready to 
sink sooner or later into the human hearts prepared to 
receive and germinate them. It is a wonderful Universe ! 
— and wonderful things come of it ! " He paused again, 
and then held out his hand. " Forgive my spleen, Beau- 
vais ! Good-night ! " 

" Good-night ! " I answered, feeling somewhat saddened 
myself by his utter dejection. " But I wish you would 
let me accompany you part of the way ! " 

" On the contrary, you will oblige me, mon cher, by 
sticking to your work, and allowing me to saunter home in 
my own desultory fashion. I want to think out a diffi- 
culty, and I must be by myself to do it." 

He walked across the room, I following him, and had 
nearly reached the door when he turned sharply round 
and confronted me. 

" Supposing 1 had sinned greatly and irretrievably, 
Beauvais, could you forgive me ? " 

I stared at him, astonished. 

" Sinned .-* You ? Greatly and irretrievably .-* Non- 
sense] One might as well expect sin from the arch- 
angel Raphael ! " 



WORMWOOD. 8x 

He broke into a laugh, forced, harsh, and bitter. 

" Milks rcvicrcicmetits / Upon my word, Beauvais, 
you flatter me ! If / am like the archangel Raphael, 
then Raphael has deserted Heaven for Hell quite re* 
cently! But you do not answer my question. Could you 
forgive me .-* " 

His feverishly brilliant eyes seemed to probe my very 
soul, and I hesitated before replying, for, strange to say, 
the old inexplicable sense of distrust and aversion rose 
up in me anew, and seemed not only to throw a sudden 
cloud over his beauty, but also in part to quench my 
friendly sympathy. 

*' I do not think I have a malicious nature " — I said at 
last doubtfully — " and I have never borne any one a last- 
ing grudge that I can remember. I do not profess par- 
ticularly Christian principles either, because, like many 
of my countrymen of to-day, I rather adhere to the 
doctrines of a new Universal Religion springing solely 
out of Human Social Unity, — but I think I could forgive 
everything except " 

*' Except what ? " he asked eagerly. 

" Deliberate deceit," I answered, " wilful betrayal of 
trust, — insidious tampering with honor, — this sort of 
thing I do not fancy I could ever pardon." 

" And suppose / deceived you in a great and impor- 
tant matter ? " persisted Guide'l, still looking at me. I met 
his gaze fixedly, and spoke out the blunt truth as I then 
felt it. 

" Frankly, — I should never forgive you ! " 

He laughed again, rather boisterously this time, and 
once more shook hands. 

" Well said, Beauvais ! I honor you for the sturdy 
courage of your opinions ! Never put up with deceit ! 
A spoken lie is bad enough, — but a wilfully acted lie is 
worse ! And yet, alas ! — what a false world we live in ! 
— how full of the most gracefully performed lying ! The 
pity of it is that when truth is spoken, no one can be got 
to believe it. You know the pretty song which says — 

" * Mieux que la rialiti 
Vaut un beau inensongel' 

Oddly enough, the least strophe of poetry always reminds 
6 



82 WORMWOOD. 

me of that clever Mademoiselle St. Cyr ! She returns to 
Paris soon, I suppose ? " 

" She is expected every day," I replied, glad of a more 
commonplace turn to the conversation. '' She may be 
home to-morrow." 

" Indeed ! I shall be glad to see her again ! " 

" So shall I ! " I agreed emphatically. " Pauline wiil 
soon recover her good spirits in her cousin's company." 

" No doubt, — no doubt ! " And he looked preoccupied 
and thoughtful, then, with a sudden start, he exclaimed, 
" My good Beauvais ! I forgot ! Your marriage takes 
place almost immediately, does it not ? " 

" At the beginning of next month," I answered, smil- 
ing. 

He seized me by both hands enthusiastically. 

*'Ah! Voila le bo?iheur qui vie?it vite ! ^^ And his 
eyes flashed radiance into mine, — " I am ashamed, Beau- 
vais ! — positively ashamed to have darkened your thresh- 
old with the shadow of myself in an ill-humor ! A 
thousand pardons ! I will go home and get to bed — with 
to-morrow's sun I shall probably rise a wiser and more 
cheerful man ! Think no more of my peevishness ; we 
all grumble at fate now and then. An revoir^ cher cuni ! 
and may your dreams be rose-lit with the glory of love 
and the face of — Pauline ! " 

With a bright smile, more dazzling than usual by con- 
trast with his previous gloom, he left me, — and I watched 
him from the street-door as he strode swiftly across the 
road and turned in the direction of his uncle's residence 
His behavior was certainly strange for one who was 
usually the very quintessence of saintly serenity ana 
studious reserve ; — I was puzzled by it, and could not 
make him out at all. However, after a little cogitation 
with myself, I came to the conclusion that matters were 
truly as he had said, — that Paris had unsettled him, and 
that he was beginning to have serious doubts as to 
whether after all it was his true vocation to be a priest. 
I myself had doubted it ever since I had come to know 
him intimately, — he was too fond of science and philos- 
ophy, — too clever, too handsome, and too young to resign 
all life's splendid opportunities for the service of a nar- 
row and cramping religion. 1 could thoroughly under- 
stand the difficulty in which he was placed, — and I 



WOA'AfWOOD. 83 

wished him well out of bondage into the liberty of the 
free. That night I was busy at my work up to the small 
hours of the morning ; and when 1 did get to bed at last, 
my slumber was not very refreshing. I continued my 
task of adding up figures throughout my dreams, without 
ever arriving at any precise conclusion. I tried in the 
usual futile visionary way to come to some result of all 
these distressful and anxious calculations, but in vain, — 
the arithmetical jumble refused to clear itself up in any 
sort of fashion, and bothered me all night long, though 
now and then it dispersed itself out of numbers into 
words, and became a monotonous refrain of the lines 

*^ Mietix que la rialiti 
Vaut un beau mensonge ! " 



24 WORMWOOD. 



IX. 

On the following afternoon, between four and five 
o'clock, I went to see Pauline, as I had promised her 
mother I would, — a promise I myself was only too eager 
to fulfil. Remembering her extreme fondness for flowers, 
I bought a basket of lilies-of-the-valley at the establish- 
ment of a famous horticulturist, noted for his exquisite 
taste in floral designs, — it was tied with loops of white 
and palest pink ribbon, and the delicate blossoms loved 
by Christ of old were softly shaded over by the fine 
fronds of the prettiest fern known, the dainty maiden- 
hair. Armed with this fragrant trophy of love, I entered 
the little morning-room where the " the k I'Anglaise " was 
already prepared, and found Pauline awaiting me, look- 
ing a perfect fairy vision of youthful grace, mirth, and 
loveliness ! She sprang forward to greet me, — she took 
the lilies from my hands and kissed them, — she threw her 
arms round my neck and thanked me with the same 
child-like rapture and enthusiasm that had distinguished 
her on the night I first met her, when she had talked so 
ecstatically about the " marrofis glaceT I held her in 
my close embrace, and studied her features with all a 
lover's passionate scrutiny, — but I could discover no 
traces of tears in her eyes, — no touch of pallid grief upon 
Her rose-flushed cheeks ; — her smiles were radiant as a 
June morning, and I inwardly rejoiced to find her so full 
of her old sparkling animation and vivacity. Drawing a 
comfortable chair up to the table, she made me sit down 
while she prepared the tea, and I watched her with 
almost dazzled eyes of love and admiration, as she flitted 
about the room like a sylph on wings. 

" I was told that you were ill yesterday, Pauline ! " 
— I said presently — " that you were crying, — that you 
were unhappy. Was that true t " 

She looked up laughingly. 

" Oh yes, quite true 1 " she answered, with a droll lit- 



WORAflVOOD. S5 

tie gesture of self-disdain. " So many tears, Gaston ! 
I almost lloated away on an ocean of them ! So many 
dreadful gasps and ugly sobs! Tims! I am sure I 
have a red nose still, — is it not so ? " 

And, kneeling down beside me, she raised her fair face 
to mine in mirthful inquiry. Kissing her, I told her she 
had never looked lovelier, which was true, — whereupon 
she sprang up and curtsied demurely. 

*' I am glad I am pretty still ! " she said, — then all at 
once a darkness crossed her brows like the shadow of a 
cloud. " How horrible it would be to grow ugly, Gaston ! 
— to get worn and thin and old, with great black rings 
like spectacles round the eyes, — to lose all the gloss out 
of one's hair, — and to be so weary, so weary, that the 
feet will hardly bear one along ! Ah ! — I saw a woman 
like that the other day, — she sat on one of the seats in 
the Bois, quite quite alone, — with no one to pity her. Her 
eyes said despair, despair ! — always despair ! — and my 
heart ached for her ! " 

" But you must not think about these things, my dar- 
ling," I said, taking her hand and drawing her towards 
me. "There are many such sad sights in Paris and in 
all large cities, — but you must not dwell upon them. 
And as for getting ugly ! " — I laughed — " you need have 
no fear of that ! — you are growing more beautiful every 
day ! " 

" You think so 1 " she queried with a coquettish in- 
quisitiveness. " That is well ! I am pleased, — for I 
wish to be beautiful." 

" You are beautiful ! " I re-asserted emphatically. 

" Not as beautiful as I should like to be ! " she mur- 
mured musingly. " There are some people, — even men, 
— who are possessed of beauty that can never be matched, 
— that is quite unique, like the beauty of the sculptured 
Greek heroes, and then it is indeed wonderful ! " She 
paused, — then rousing herself with a slight start, she 
went on more gayly, " Come, Gaston, we will have tea ! 
We will be like the good people in England, — we will 
sip hot stuff and talk a little scandal between the sips. 
That is the proper way ! Now there is your cup, — here 
is mine. Bien ! — Whom shall we abuse ? " 

I laughed, — she looked so pretty and mischievous. 
^ " Wait a little," I said, " you have not told me yet why 



S6 tVORMWOOD. 

you cried so much yesterday, Pauline ? You admit that 
you did cry, — well ! — what was the reason ? " 

She shrugged her shoulders. 

^^Qui salt! I cannot tell! It was pieasant — it did 
me good ! " 

" Pleasant to cry ? " I queried amusedly. 

" Very pleasant ! " she answered. " Something was in 
my heart, you know, — something strange, like a bird that 
wished to sing and fly far, far away ! — but it was caged, — 
and so it fluttered and fluttered a little and teased me, — ■ 
but when the tears came it was quite still. And now it 
remains quite still !— I do not think it will try to sing or 
to fly any more ! " 

There was a quaint touch of pathos in these words 
that moved me uneasily. I put down my as yet untasted 
cup of tea, and stretched out my hand. 

" Come here, Pauline ! " 

She came obediently. 

I set her, like a little child, on my knee, and looked 
earnestly into her face. 

" Tell me, my darling," I said, with tender seriousness, 
" is there anything that is troubling you .'' Have you 
some unhappiness that you conceal from every one i* — 
and, if so, may /not be your confidant ? Surely you can 
trust me ! You know how truly and ardently I love you ! 
• — you know that I would do anything in the world for 
you, — you might set me any task, however difficult, and 
I would somehow manage to perform it ! My whole life 
is yours, my dearest ! — will you not confide your griefs to 
me, — if you have griefs, — and let me not only share them, 
but lift the burden of them altogether from your mind, 
which ought to be as bright and untroubled as a mid- 
summer sky ! " 

She met my searching gaze openly, — her breathing was 
a little quicker than usual, but she gave no other sign of 
disquietude. 

" I have no griefs, Gaston," she said, in a low, rather 
tremulous voice; "none at least that I can give words to. 
I think — perhaps, — I am a little tired ! — and — I have 
missed IT^loise " 

" Is thai your trouble ? " and I smiled. " But what will 
you do without Ilcloisc when you arc married? " 
, " I — I do not know ! " bhe faltered timidly. " I shall 



IVORAflVOOD. 3; 

have you then 1 " I kissed her. " And you are very, 
very kind to me, Gaston ! and i promise you " 

" What ? " I asked eagerly. 

She hesitated a moment, then went on — " I promise 
you I will tell you if I get sad again — yes ! — I will tell you 
everything ! — and you will be good and gentle with me, 
and comfort me, will you not ? " 

" Indeed I will, my darling, my angel ! " I said, fondly 
caressing her pretty hair. " Who should console you in 
any sorrow if not I ? I shall be quite jealous of Heloise 
if she is to have the largest share of your confidence." 

" But she will not have it," interrupted Pauline quite 
suddenly. " I could never tell her any — any dreadful 
trouble ! " 

I laughed. " Let us hope you will never know what 
any * dreadful ' trouble is ! " I rejoined earnestly. "But 
why could you not tell Heloise } " 

She mused a little before replying, — then said, speaking 
slowly and thoughtfully — 

"Because she is so great and grand and far above me 
in everything ! Ah, you smile as if you did not believe 
me, Gaston, — but you do not know her ! Heloise is 
divi7iel — her goodness seems to me quite unearthly! I 
have caught her sometimes at her prayers — and it is 
beautiful to see her face looking as pure and sweet as an 
angel's ! — and her lovely closed eyelids just like shut-up 
shells, — and she has such long lashes, Gaston ! — longer 
than mine ! She reminds me of a picture that used to 
hang in one of the chapels at the Convent of the Sacre 
Coeur, — Santa Filomena it was, crowned with thorns and 
lilies. And she is so very very good in every way that I 
know I should never have courage to tell her if — if I had 
been wicked ! " 

Here she lowered her eyes, and a hot blush wavered 
across her face. 

" But you have not been wicked, child ! " I exclaimed, 
still somewhat puzzled by her manner. " You could not 
be wicked if you tried ! " 

" You think not t " she returned softly, raising her eyes 
again to mine, and I observed that she was now as pale 
as she had a minute before been flushed. " Dear Gas- 
ton ! You are so fond of me ! — and always kind ! I am 
very very grateful 1 " 



88 Wormwood. 

Nestling down, she laid her head against my breast for 
a second, — then springing up again, pushed back her 
rich curls, and laughingly remonstrated with me for not 
drinking my tea. 

" It is cold now, — I will pour you out some more," she 
said, suiting the action to the word. " Don't let us talk 
of disagreeable things, Gaston, — of my crying, and all 
that nonsense ! It was very stupid of me to cry, — you 
must forget it, — for to-day I am quite well and merry, — 
and — and — oh, do let us be happy while we can ! " 

Whereupon she seated herself opposite to me, and be- 
gan chatting away, just in her old bright fashion, of all 
sorts of things, — of her parents, — of the extra dainty 
luxuries " Maman " had recently added to her trousseau ; 
— and with feminine tact, she managed to draw together 
such an inexhaustible number of brilliant trifles in her 
conversation, that, charmed by her vivacity, I ceased to 
remember that she could ever have been sad, even for an 
hour. But, before I left her, I was made miserable again 
by a very untoward circumstance. Just when I was about 
to say good-bye, — for the excess of my work would not 
allow me to stay with her longer, — I alluded once more 
to her past depression, and said — 

"You are such a bright fairy now, Pauline, that I think 
you must try and put our friend Guidel in better spirits 
when next you see him. He seems in a very melancholy 
frame of mind ! Oddly enough, yesterday, when you were 
so sad, he was with me, giving utterance to the most 
lugubrious sentiments. In fact, I thought he was ill " — 
Pauline was about to fasten a flower in my coat, but here 
she dropped it, and stooped down on the floor to find it 
— " so ill," I continued, " that I was for going home with 
him to see that he got there all right ; but he assured me 
it was only a maladie de tristesse. I fancy he doesn't want 
to be a priest after all " — here Pauline found the fallen 
blossom she was searching for, and began to pin it in my 
button-hole with such shaking fingers that I became 
alarmed. " Why, you are shivering, my darling ! Are 
you cold ? " 

" A little ! " she murmured. " I — I " The sen- 
tence died on her lips, and with a helpless swaying 
movement she fell in a sudden swoon at my feet ! 

Wild with fright, I caught her up in my arms, and rang 



IVOKMWOOD. S9 

the bell furiously, — the Comtesse de Charmilles came 
hurrying in, and in obedience to her rapid instructions, 1 
laid my pretty little one down on a sofa, and looked on in 
rigid anxiety, while her mother bathed her hands and 
forehead with eau-de-cologne. 

*' She has fainted like this once before," said the Com- 
tesse, in a low tone. '* Do not be alarmed, Gaston, — she 
will be all right in a minute or two. Did you ask hei 
what I told you ? " 

I nodded in the affirmative. I could not take my eyes 
off the lovely little face that lay so pale and quiet on the 
sofa pillows near me. 

" And did she say anything ? " 

" Nothing ! " I answered with a sigh. " Nothing, ex- 
cept that she was quite well, and quite happy, and that 
she had no grief whatever. And she promised that if 
ever she felt sad again, she would come to me and tell 
me everything ! " 

A look of evident relief brightened the mother's watch- 
ful face, and she smiled. 

" That is well ! " she said gently. " I am glad she 
promised that ! As for this little ?naiaise, I attach no 
importance to it. Young and over-excitable girls often 
faint in this foolish little way. There ! — she is better 
now — see ! — she is looking at you ! " 

And indeed the sweet blue eyes, that were heaven's 
own light to my soul, had opened, and were fixed_wistfully 
upon me. Eagerly I bent over her couch. 

" Is that you, Gaston .? " she faintly inquired. 

For all answer I kissed her. 

" Thank you ! " she said, with a pretty plaintiveness. 
" Now you will go away, will you not ? — and let Maman 
take care of me. My head aches — but that is nothing. 
I shall be quite well again soon ! " She smiled, and the 
warm color came back to her cheeks. " Au revoir, 
Gaston ! Kiss me once more, — it comforts me to think 
how good and true and kind you are ! " 

With what reverential tenderness I pressed my lips to 
hers. Heaven only knows ! — I little imagined it was the 
last time I should ever touch that sweet mouth with the 
passionate sign of love's dearest benediction ! She closed 
her eyes again then, — and the Comtesse told me in a soft 
undertone, that she would now in all probability fall 



90 WORMIVOOD. 

asleep and slumber away her temporary weakness, — so, 
making my whispered adieux to the gentle and patiently 
absorbed mother, I stole on tip-toe from the room, and in 
another minute or two had left the house. 

Once out in the open air, however, I became a prey 
to the most extraordinary and violent anxiety. Every- 
thing to my mind looked suddenly overcast with gloom, 
I knew not why. Certainly the sun had set, and the dusk 
was deepening, — but the closing-in of the evening shadows 
did not, as a rule, affect my spirits with such a sense of 
indefinable dreariness. I walked home mechanically, 
brooding on Pauline's fainting-fit, and exaggerating it 
more and more in my thoughts till it assumed the propor- 
tion of an ominous symptom of approaching death. I 
worked myself up into such a morbid condition of mind, 
that the very trees, covered with their young green and 
bursting buds, merely suggested the trees in cemeteries, 
that were also looking heartlessly gay, because it was 
Spring, regardless of the dead in the ground below them. 
And, occupied with my miserable musings, I nearly ran 
up against Silvion Guidel, who was coming in an opposite 
direction, — he looked like the ghost of a fair Greek God, 
I thought, — so wan and wild-eyed yet beautiful was he. 
He caught my hands eagerly, 

" Where are you going, Beauvais ? You look as if you 
were stumbling along in a dream ! " 

I forced a smile. " I dare say I do, — I feel like it ! 
Pauline is very ill, Guidbl ! — she fainted at my feet to- 
day ! " 

He turned sharply round as though he suddenly per- 
ceived some one he knew, — then hurriedly apologized. 

" I thought I saw my old chiffo?iier,^^ he said lightly. 
" A friend and pensioner of mine, to whom for my soul's 
sake I give many an odd sou. Mademoiselle de Char- 
milles fainted, you say.'' Oh, but that is not a very 
alarming symptom ! " 

I considered that he treated the case with undue levity, 
and told him so rather vexedly. He laughed a little. 

^^Mon cher, 1 will not encourage you in your morbid 
humor any more than you encouraged me last night in 
mine. You are — like all lovers — inclined to exaggerate 
every trifiing ailment affecting the well-being of the person 
loved. If / loved, — if I could love, — I suppose 1 should 



wojarwooD. 91 

be the same ! But I have the hollow heart of a perpetual 
celibate, ftion ami !^' — and he laughed again — "so I can 
be merry and wise, both together. And out of my mirth — 
which is great, — and my wisdom — which is even greater 1 
— I would advise you not to dwell with such melancholy 
profoundness on the slight indisposition of your fair 
fiancee. To faint is nothing, — many a school-girl faints 
at early mass, and the teachers think it of very little im- 
port." 

But I was too full of my own view of the matter to 
listen. 

"All in one minute" — I persisted morosely — "the 
dear child fell in a dead swoon, — and I had just been 
speaking to her TihovX you /" 

" About me ! " and he bit his lips hard. '"'' Mon Dieu 1 
— what an uninteresting subject of conversation ! " 

" I had been telling her " — I went on — " that you seemed 
to be ill last night, — ill and sad ; and I had even suggested 
that she, out of her own brightness, should try to put you 

in better spirits the next time she saw you, Really 

Guid^l, you are horribly brusque to-day ! " 

For he had seized my hand, shaking it, and was actu- 
ally rushing off ! 

" A thousand pardons, ino7i cher ! " he said, in quick, 
rather hoarse accents ; " I am bound on an errand of 
charity — I must fulfill it ! — it is getting late, and I have 
very little time .'' Au revoir ! I will see you later on ! " 

And away he went, walking at an unusually rapid rate, 
— and for the moment I was quite hurt at the entire want 
of sympathy he had shown with regard to Pauline's ill- 
ness. But I presently came to the conclusion that of 
course he could not be expected to feel as / felt about it, 
— and I resumed the nursing of my own dismal mood in 
unrelieved despondency till I reached home, where the 
work I had to do in part distracted me from my sadder 
thoughts. No one interrupted me. Silvion Guidel did 
not come " later on " as he had said, and I saw him no 
more that night. Towards bed-time I got a telegram from 
my father, announcing that he would return home on the 
next day but one. This news was some slight consolation 
to me, — as, with his arrival, I knew I should be released 
from many onerous duties at the bank, — and so have more 
time to spend in Pauline's company. Yet, nevertheless, 



9^ 



WORMWOOD, 



I remained in the same state of mental dejection, mingled 
with a certain vague and superstitious morbidness, — for 
when I went up to my bedroom, and looked out at the 
skies before shutting the shutters, I saw a dense black 
rain-cloud creeping up from the western horizon, and I 
at once took it as an ill omen to my own fortunes. I 
watched it darkening the heavens slowly and blotting out 
the stars ; and, as I heard the wind beginning to moan 
softly among the near branches, I murmured to myself 
almost unconsciously — 

" Les dmes dontfaurais besotn 

Et les itoiles sont trop loin ! 
Je vais mourir seul — dans un coin ! ** 

These lines worried me, — I could not imagine how they 
had managed to fix themselves in my memory. I put 
them down to Heloise and her bizarre recitations, — but 
all the same they made me inexplicably wretched. Shiv- 
ering with the chill the approaching storm was already 
sending through the air, I closed my window, went to bed, 
and slept soundly, peacefully, and deliciously ; — I remem- 
ber it thus particularly because it was the last time I ex- 
perienced the blessing of sleep. The last, — ^the very last 
time I say ! I have not slept at al^i since then, — I hrave 
only dreamed 1 



WORMWOOD* 93 



X. 

With the morrow's daybreak came a complete change 
in the weather, — a change that was infinitely dismal and 
dreary. The bright sunshine, that had been like God's 
best blessing on the world for the past two weeks, disap- 
peared as though it had never shone, and rain fell in tor- 
rents. A wild wind blew round and round the city in 
sweeping gusts, tearing off the delicate young leaves 
from their parent branches and making pitiful havoc of 
all the sweet-scented gayly-colored spring blossoms. It 
■was a miserable morning, — but in spite of wind and rain 
I started rather earlier than usual for the bank, as, my 
father having now signified the next day as the one of his 
certain return, I was anxious he should find everything in 
the most absolute order on his arrival, and thus be as- 
sured of my value not only as a good son, but also as a 
thoroughly reliable partner. We were all up to our ears 
in work that day, — a greal of extra business came in, and 
the hours flew on so rapidly that it was past six o'clock 
in the afternoon before I was released from my office 
bondage, — and, even then, I still had a good many mat- 
ters to attend to when I got back to my own house. I 
had no leisure to call at the De Charmilles', though I 
longed to know how Pauline was, — but I did not fret my- 
self so greatly about that now as previously, knowing that 
by the next noon my father would have arrived, and that 
I should then have my time very much more at my own 
disposal. I'he rain still continued pouring fiercely, — 
Very few people were abroad in the streets, — and though 
I took the omnibus part of the way home, the few steps 
that remained between that vehicle and my own door, 
were sufficient to drench me through. As soon as I got 
in, 1 changed my clothes, had my solitary dinner, and 
ordered a small wood fire to be lit in the library, whither 
I presently repaired with my papers and account books, 
and wa5 soon so busily engrossed that I almost forgot the 



94 



WORMWOOD. 



angry storm that was raging without, save in the intervals 
of work, when I heard the rain beat in gusty clamor at 
the windows, and the trees groan as they rustled and 
swayed backwards and forwards in the increasing fury of 
the gale. Presently, from the antique time-piece, that 
stood on an equally antique secretaire ]\isX. behind me, nine 
o'clock struck with a loud and brazen clang, — and as it 
ceased I laid down my pen for a moment and listened to 
the deepening snarl of the savage elements. 

" What a night ! " I thought. " A night for demons to 
stalk abroad, and witches to ride through the air on 
broomsticks ! Dieu / how dull it is ! One must smoke 
to keep the damp away." 

And I opened my cigar-case. I was just about to 
strike a light, when I fancied I heard something like a 
faint, very faint attempt to ring the street-door bell. I 
listened, — the same sound was repeated. It was much 
too feeble to attract the attention of the servants below, — 
and as the library windows jutted on the street, and as I 
could, by drawing aside the curtain a little, generally see 
whosoever might ascend our steps, I peeped cautiously 
out. At first I could perceive nothing, the night was so 
wet and dark ; but presently I discerned a slight shadowy 
figure huddled against the door as though sheltering itself 
from the pitiless rain. 

" Some poor starving soul," I soliloquized, " who per- 
haps does not know where to turn in all Paris for bread. 
I'll see who it is." 

And, acting on the impulse that moved me to be 
charitable to any unhappy creature benighted in such a 
hurricane, I crossed the passage softly and opened the 
door wide. As I did so, the figure started back in appar- 
ent fear, — it was a veiled woman, — and through the veil I 
felt her eyes looking at me. 

" What is it .^ " I asked, as gently as I could. " What 
do you want ? " 

For all answer, two hands were stretched towards me 
in wild appeal, and a sobbing voice cried — 

" Gaston ! " 

" My God ! Pauline ! " 

Seized by a mortal terror, and with a convulsive effort 
as though I were dragging forth some drowning creature 
from the sea, I caught her in my arms and almost lifted 



WORMWOOD. 95 

her across the threshold ; how I supported her, whether 
I carried her or led her, I never knew, — my senses were 
all in a whirl, and I realized nothing; distinctly till I had 
reached the library once more, and placed her, a shudder- 
ing, drooping little creature, in the arm-chair I had but 
iust vacated near the fire. Then my dazed brain righted 
Itself, and I flung myself at her feet in an agony of alarm 
and suspense. 

** Pauline, Pauline ! " I whispered, " what is this ? — why 
have you come here 1 In such a storm of rain and wind 
too ! See ! " — and I took up the end of her dress and 
wrung it in my hands — " You are wet through ! My 
darling, you frighten me ! — Are you ill .'' — has any one been 
unkind to you ? " 

She lifted her head and tremblingly put back the close 
veils he wore, — and I uttered a stifled cry at the pale 
misery imprinted on her fair, fair young face. 

" No one has been unkind," she said in a faint plaintive 
voice, like the voice of one weakened by long physical 
suffering ; " and — I am not ill ! I want to speak to you, 
Gaston ! — I promised you that if I was very sad and 
troubled, I would tell you everything, — and you said you 
would be gentle with me and would comfort me, — you 
remember ? Well, now I have come ! — to tell you some- 
thing that must be told, — and to-night is my only chance, 
— for they have gone, — papa and mamma — to the theatre, 
and I am all alone. They wanted me to go with them, 
but I begged them to leave me at home, — I felt that I 
must see you quite by yourself, — and tell you, — yes ! — tell 
you everything ! " 

A long shivering sigh escaped her lips ; and frozen to 
the very soul by a dim fear that I could not analyze, I 
rose from my kneeling position at her side, and stood 
stiflly upright. At first my only thought was for her. A 
young girl coming alone to the house of her lover at 
night in a city like Paris, exposed herself, consciously or 
unconsciously, to the direst slander, and it was with this 
idea that I was chiefly occupied as I looked at her crouch- 
ing form in the chair beside me. I hastily considerea 
the ©nly possible risk she at present incurred, — namely 
that of being seen by our servants and made the subjecx 
of their idle gossip, and I determined to circumvent this 
at any rate. 



^6 WORMWOOD. 

" Pauline, my little one," I said gravely, " whatever it 
is you wish to tell me, could you not have waited till I 
came to see you in the usual way ? You ought not to 
have flown hither so recklessly, little bird ! you expose 
yourself to scandal." 

" Scandal ! " she echoed, looking at me with a feverish 
light in her blue eyes. " It cannot say more evil of me 
than I deserve ! — and I could not wait ! — I have waited 
already far too long ! " 

A great heaviness fell on my heart at these words, — 
my very lips grew cold, and a tremor ran through me. 
But, nevertheless, I resolved to carry out the notion I had 
preconceived of keeping this nocturnal flight of hers a 
profound secret. 

" Stay here," I said, as calmly as I could for the shak- 
ing dread that possessed me. " Try to get warm, — I 
will bring you some wine. Take that wet cloak off and 
be quite quiet, — I will return immediately." 

She looked after me with a sort of beseeching won- 
derment as I left her, but I dared not meet her eyes — 
there was an expression in them that terrified me ! I 
went, as in a dream, to the dining-room ; got some wine 
and a glass, — carefully turned out the lights, and then 
proceeded to the head of the basement stairs and called 
our man-servant. 

"Dunois!" 

" Oui, m'sieu ! " 

" Tell them all down there that they can go to bed, — 
you can do the same. I shall want nothing more to- 
night. I have locked the street-door, and the lamps are 
out in the dining-room. My father will be home to- 
morrow, — so you will all have to be up early — call me 
about seven. Do you hear .? " 

" Oui, m'sieu ! " 

" Good night ! " 

Dunois responded, — and I listened breathlessly while 
he repeated my orders to the other servants. I waited 
yet a few minutes and presently heard them preparing to 
acsend their own private stairway to the top of the house, 
where they each had their several rooms. They were 
hard workers, and were always glad of extra rest ; — they 
would soon be sound asleep, thank Heaven ! — they 
need know nothing. Satisfied that so far, all was safe, 1 



WORAfWOOD. 97 

stepped noiselessly back to the library, and, entering, 
closed and locked the door. Pauline was sitting exactly 
in the same position, — her wet cloak still clinf;ing round 
her, — her veil Hung back, her hands clasped, and her 
eyes fixed on the red embers of the fire. Approaching, 
I, without a word, loosened her cloak and took it off, and 
methodically hung it on the back of two chairs to dry, — 
I removed the little rain-soaked hat from her tumbled 
curls, and pouring out a glass of wine, held it to her lips 
with a firm hand enough, though God knows my heart 
was beating as though it would burst its fleshly prison. 

" Drink this, Pauline," I said authoritatively. *' Come, 
you must dr\nk\t, — you are as cold as ice. When you 
have taken it, I will listen to — to whatever you w^ish to 
say." 

She obeyed me mechanically, and managed to swallow 
half the contents of the glass, — then she put it away 
from her with a faint gesture of aversion. 

" I cannot drink it, Gaston ! " she faltered, " it seems 
to suffocate me ! " 

I set it aside, and looked at her, waiting for her next 
words. But no words came. She fixed her large soft 
eyes upon me with the wistful entreaty of a hunted fawn, 
■ — then suddenly the tears welled up into them and 
brimmed over, and, covering her face, she broke into 
piteous and passionate sobbing. Every nerve in my 
body seemed to be wrenched and tortured by the sound | 
I could not bear to see her in such grief, and kneeling 
dow^n beside her once more, I put my arms round her 
and pressed her pretty head against my breast. But I 
did not kiss her ; some strange instinct held me back 
from that / 

" Do not cry, Pauline ! — do not cry ! " I implored, 
rocking her to and fro as if she were a little tired child. 
" Do not, my darling I — it breaks my heart ! Tell me 
what is the matter, — you are not afraid of me, mofi aiige^ 
— are you ? Hush, hush ! To see you in such unhap- 
piness quite distracts me, Pauline ! — it unmans me, — do 
try to be calm ! You are quite safe with me, — no one 
will come near us, — no one knows you are here, — and I 
will take you home myself as soon as you are more 
tranquil. There ! — now you shall speak to me as long 

7 



98 WORMWOOD. 

as you like, — you shall tell me everything — everything; 
except that you do not love me any more ! " 

With a faint exclamation and a sudden movement, 
she loosened my arms from her waist and drew herself 
apart. 

" Oh, poor Gaston ! — but that is just what I must tell 
you ! " she sobbed. " Oh, forgive me — forgive me ! I 
have done you great wrong, — I have deceived you 
wickedly, — but oh, do not be cruel to me, though I am so 
cruel to you ! Do not be cruel, — I cannot bear it ! — it 
will kill me ! I ought to have told you long ago, — but I 
was a coward, — I was afraid, — I am afraid still ! — but I 
dare not hide the truth from you, — you must know every- 
thing. I — I do not love you, Gaston ! I have never 
loved you as you ought to be loved ; I never knew the 
meaning of love till now ! " 

Till now ! What did these words imply ? I gazed at 
her in dumb blank amazement, — my brain seemed frozen. 
I could not think, I could not speak, — I only knew, in a 
sort of dim indistinct way, that she had removed herself 
from my embrace, and that perhaps — perhaps it was, 
under the circumstances, embarrassing to her to see me 
kneeling at her feet in such devout, adoring fashion, when, 
. . . when she no longer loved me I She no longer loved 
me ! — I could not realize it ; — and still less could I 
realize that she never had loved me ! I got up slowly and 
stood beside her, resting one arm on the mantelpiece, — 
my limbs shook and my head swam round stupidly, — and 
yet, through all my bewilderment, I was still conscious of 
her misery, — conscious of her tear-spoilt eyes, — her 
white face and quivering lips, — and of the unutterable 
despair that made even hor youthful features look drawn 
and old, — and out of very pity for iier woe-begone aspect, 
I tried to master the sudden shock of unexpected wretch- 
edness that overwhelmed my soul. I tried to speak, — 
my voice seemed gone, — and it was only after one or 
two efforts that I managed to regain command of lan- 
guage. 

" This is strange, news ! " I then said, in hoarse unsteady 
accents. " Very strange news, Pauline ! You no longer 
love me ? — You have never loved me ? You never knew 
the meaning of love till now t — Till now I — Pardon me if 
I do not understand, — I am, no doubt, dull of comprehen- 



WOKMlVOOb. 99 

sion, — but such words from your lips sound terrible to me, 
—unreal, impossible ! 1 must liavc been dreaming all 
this while, for — for you have seemed to love me — till now, 
as you say — //// no7v ! " 

She sprang from her chair and confronted me, her hands 
extended as though in an agony of supplication. 

" Oh, there is my worst sin, Gaston ! " she wailed. 
"There is the treachery to you of which I have been 
guilty ! I have seemed to love you — yes ! and it was 
wicked of me — wicked — wicked — but I have been blind 
and desperate and mad, — and I could see no way out of 
the evil I have brought upon myself, — no way but this — 
to tell you all before it is too late — to throw myself at 
your feet — so ! " — and she flung herself wildly down before 
me — " to pray to you, as I would pray to God, — to ask 
you to pardon me, to have mercy upon me, — and, above 
all other things, to generously break the tie between us, — 
to break it now — at once ! — and to let me feel that at 
least I am no longer wronging your trust, or injuring your 
future by my fault of love for one who has grown dearer 
to me than you could ever be, — dearer than life itself, — 
dearer than honor, dearer than my own soul's safety — 
dearer than God ! " 

She spoke with an almost tempestuous intensity of 
passion, — and I looked at her where she crouched on 
the ground, — looked at her in a dull, sick wonderment. 
This child — this playful pretty trifler with time and the 
things of time, was transformed ; — from a mere charm- 
ing gracefully frivolous girl, she had developed into a 
wild tragedy queen ; and the change had been effected 
by — what ? Love ! Love for what, — or whom ? Not 
for me ! — not for me — no ! — for some one else ! Who 
was that some one else ? This question gradually as- 
serted itself in my straying stupefied thoughts as the 
chief thing to be answered, — the vital poison of the 
w^hole bitter draught, — the final stab that was to com- 
plete the murder. As I considered it, a new and awful 
instinct rose up within me, — the thirst for revenge that 
lurks in the soul of every man and beast — the silently 
concentrated fury of the tiger that has lain so long in 
waiting for its prey that its brute patience is well- 
nigh exhausted, — and involuntarily I clenched my hands 
and bit my lips hard in the sudden and insatiate eager- 



loo WORMWOOD. 

ness that possessed me, to know the name of my rival ! 
Again I looked down on Pauline's slight shuddering 
figure, and became hazily conscious that she ought not to 
kneel there as a suppliant to me, and, — stooping a little, 
I held out my hand, which she caught and kissed impul- 
sively. Ah, Heaven ! how I trembled at that caressing 
touch ! 

" Rise, Pauline ! " I said, trying to keep my voice steady. 
" Rise, — do not be afraid ! — I — I think I understand, — 
I shall realize it all better presently. Perhaps you have 
never quite known how ardently I have loved you, — with 
what passionate fervor, — with what adoring tenderness ! 
and what you say to me now is a shock, Pauline ! — a cruel 
blow that will numb and incapacitate my whole life ! But 
one man's pain does not matter much, does it ? — come, 
rise, I beg of you, and let me strive to get some clearer 
knowledge of this sad and unexpected change in your feel- 
ings. You do not love me, so you tell me, — and you 
never have loved me. You own to having played the 
part of loving me, — but now you ask me to break the 
solemn tie between us, because you love some one else, — 
have I understood you thus far correctly ? " 

She had sunk back again in the chair near the fire, and 
her pale lips whispered a faint affirmative. I waited a 
minute, — then I asked — 

" And who, Pauline, — who is that some one else } " 

" Oh, why should you know ! " she exclaimed, the tears 
filling her eyes again. " Why should you even wish to 
know! It is not needful, — At would only add to your 
unhappiness ! I cannot tell you, Gaston — I will not ! " 

I laughed, — a low laugh of exceeding bitterness. The 
notion of her keeping such a secret from me, amused me 
in a vague dull way. In my present humor, I felt that I 
could have ransacked not only earth, but heaven and hell 
together for that one name which would henceforth be to 
me the most hateful in the whole world ! But I forced 
myself to be gentle with her ; I even tried to persuade 
myself into the idea that she was perhaps exaggerating a 
mere transient foolish flirtation into the tragic height of a 
serious love affair — and I was under the influence of this 
impression when I spoke again. 

" Listen, Pauline ! You must not play with me any 
longer — if you have played with me, I can endure no more 



lyORMVVOOD. 101 

of it ! I must know who it is that has usurped my right- 
ful phice in your aflcclions. Do not try to conceal it 
from me, — it will only be doing an injury to yourself and 
to — kirn/ Is it some one you have met lately? And is 
your love for him a mere sudden freak of fancy ? — because 
if so, Pauline, let me tell you, it is not likely to last ! And 
so great and deep is my tenderness for you, dear, that I 
could even find it in my heart to have patience with this 
cruel caprice of your woman's nature — to have patience to 
the extent of waiting till it passes as pass it mtist^ Pau- 
line ! — no love of lasting value was ever kindled with such 
volcanic suddenness as this fickle fancy of yours ! Had 
the famous lovers of Verona not died, they must have 
quarrelled ! Your words, your manner, all sprmg from 
impulse, not conviction, — and I should be wronging you, 
— yes 1 actually wronging your better nature, if I were to 
hastily yield to your strange request and end the engage- 
ment between us. Why should I end it? for a wander- 
ing fitful freak, that will no doubt die of itself as rapidly 
as it came into being? No, Pauline ! — our contract is too 
solemn and too binding to be broken for a mere girlish 
whim ! " 

" But it 7nust be broken ! " she cried, springing to her 
feet and confronting me with a pale majesty of despair 
that moved me to vague awe. " It must be broken if I 
die to break it ! Whim ! — fancy ! — caprice ! — Do I look 
as if I were led by a freak ? Can you not — will you not 
understand me, Gaston ? Oh, God ! I thought you were 
more merciful ! — I have looked upon you as my only 
friend ; — I knew you were the very soul of generosity — 
and I have clung to the thought of your tenderness as my 
only chance of rescue ! I cannot — I dare not, tell them 
at home, — I am even afraid to meet Heloise ! Oh, 
Gaston ! only you can shield me from disgrace, — you can 
release me if you will, and give me the chance of freedom 
in which to retrieve my fault ! — Gaston, you can ! — you can 
do everything for me ! — you can save me by one generous 
act — break off our engagement and say to all the world 
that it is by our own mutual desire I Oh, surely you can 
understand ^lonj ! — you will not force me to confess all my 
shame — all my dishonor 1 " 

Shame I — dishonor I — Those two words, and — Pauline ! 
The air grew suddenly black around me, — black as black- 



102 WORMWOOD. 

est night, — then bright red rings swam giadily before my 
eyes, and I caught at something, I know not what, to save 
myself from falling. A cold dew broke out on my brow 
and hands, and I struggled for breath in deep panting 
gasps, conscious of nothing for the moment, except that 
she was there, and that her wild eyes were fixed in wide 
affright upon me. Presently I heard her voice as in a 
dream, cry out wailingly — 

" Gaston ! Gaston ! Do not look like that ! Oh, God, 
forgive me ! what have I done ! — what have I done 1 " 

Slowly the black mists cleared from my sight, — and I 
seemed to reel uncertainly back to a sense of being. 

" What have you done .? " I muttered hoarsely. " What 
have you done, Pauline .? — Why nothing ! — but this, — you 
have fallen from virtue to vileness ! — and — you have killed 
me — that is all ! That is what you have done — that, at 
last, I understand — at last ! " 

She broke into a piteous sobbing, — but her tears had 
ceased to move him. I sprang to her side, — I seized her 
arm. 

" Now — now — quick ! " I said, the furious passion in my 
voice jarring it to rough discord — " quick ! — I can wait 
no longer ! The name — the name of your seducer ! " 

She raised her eyes full of speechless alarm, — her lips 
moved, but no sound issued from them. There was a 
suffocating tightness in my throat, — my heart leaped to 
and fro in my breast like a savage bird in a cage, — the 
wrath that possessed me was so strong and terrible that it 
made me for the moment a veritable madman. 

" Oh speak ! " I cried, my grasp tightening on her arm. 
" Frail, false, fallen woman, speak ! — or I shall murder 
you ! The name ! — the name ! " 

Half swooning with the excess of her terror, she vainly 
strove to disengage herself from my hold, — her head 
drooped on her bosom — her eyes closed in the very 
languor of fear, — and her answering whisper stole on my 
strained sense of hearing like the last sigh of the dying — 

* ' Silviofi Guide I / ' ' 

Silvion Guidel ! — God ! I burst into wild laughter, and 
flung her from me with a gesture of fierce disdain. Sil- 
vion Guidel ! — the saint ! — the angel ! — the would-be- 
priest ! — the man with the face divine ! Silvion Guidel ! 
Detestable hypocrite ! — accursed liar ! — smiling devil 1 



IVOK^AfWOOD. 103 

Priest or no priest, he should cross swords with me, and 
thereby probe a great mystery presently ! — not a church- 
mystery, but a God-mystery — the mystery of death ! He 
should die, I swore, if 1 in fair fight could kill him ! Sil- 
vion Guid^l ' — fny friend ! — the "good " fellow I had act- 
ually revered ! — he — he had made of Pauline the wrecked 
thing she was ! — Ah, Heaven ! A wild impulse seized me 
to rush out of the house and find him wherever he might 
be, — to drag him from the very church altar if he dared to 
pollute such a place by his traitorous presence, — and 
make him then and there answer with his life for the evil 
he had done ! My face must have expressed my raging 
thoughts, — for suddenly a vision crossed my dazed and 
aching sight — the figure of Pauline grown stately, terrible, 
imperial, as any ruined queen. 

" You shall not harm him ! " she said in low thrilling 
tones of suppressed passion and fear. " You shall not 
touch a hair of his head to do him wrong ! /will pre- 
vent you ! — I ! I would give my life to shield him from 
a moment's pain ! — and you dare — you dare to think of 
injuring him ! Oh yes ! I read you through and through ; 
— you have reason, I know, to be cruel — and you may kill 
me if you like, — but not him ! Have I not told you that 
I love him ?— Love him .? — I adore him ! I have sacrificed 
everything for his sake,— and could I sacrifice more than 
everything I would do it ! — I would burn in hell forever, 
could I be sure that he was safe and happy in heaven ! " 

She looked at me straightly, — her eyes full of a mourn- 
ful exaltation, — her breath coming and going rapidly be- 
tween her parted lips. I met her glance with an amazed 
scorn, — and hurled the bitter truth like pellets of ice upon 
the amorous heat of her impetuous avowal. 

" Oh, spare me your protestations ! " I cried, — " and 
spare yourself some shred of shame ! Do not boast of 
your iniquity as though it were virtue ! — do not blazon 
forth your criminal passion as though if were a glory ! 
Heaven and Hell of which you talk so lightly, may be 
positive and awful facts after all, and not mere names to 
swear by ! — and to one or the other of them your lover 
shall go, be assured ! — and that speedily ! He shall die 
for his treachery ! — he shall die, I say ! — if the sword of 
honor can rid the world of so perfidious and dastardly a 
liar I " 



204 tVORMWOOD. 



XL 

As I uttered these words sternly and resolvedly, a 
change passed over her face, — she seemed for the mo- 
ment to grow rigid with the sudden excess of her fear. 
Then she threw herself once more on her knees at my 
feet. 

" Gaston, Gaston ! — have a little mercy ! " she im- 
plored. "Think of my deep, — my utter humiliation ! Is 
it so much that I ask of you after all ? — to break an 
engagement with a wretched sinful gill who has proved 
herself unworthy of you "i Oh, for God's sake set me 
free ! — and we will go away from Paris, I and Silvion — 
far, far away to some distant land where we shall be 
forgotten, — where the memory of us need trouble you no 
more "i Listen, Gaston ! Silvion trusts to your noble 
nature and generous heart, even as I have done — he be- 
lieves that you will have pity upon us both ! We loved 
each other from the first, — could we help that love, 
Gaston ? — could we help it ? I told you I never knew 
what love was till now, and that is true ! — I was so 
young ! — I never thought I should know such desperate 
joy, such terrible misery, such madness, such reckless- 
ness, such despair ! It seems that I have fallen into 
some great resistless river that carries me along with it 
against my will, I know not where ! — I have deceived 
you, I know, and I pray your pardon for that deceit — but 
oh, be pitiful, Gaston ! — be pitiful ! — it cannot hurt you to 
be generous ! If you ever loved me, Gaston, try to 
forgive me now ! " 

I looked down upon her in silence. There was a dull 
aching in my brows, — a cold chill at my heart. She 
seemed removed from me by immeasurable distance ; — 
she, the once innocent child — the pretty graceful girl, 
all sweetness and purity,— what was she now ? Nothing 
but — the toy of Silvion Guid^l ! No more ! — she had 



IVOKMIVOOD. 105 

entered the melancholy ranks of the ruined sisterhood, — 
even she, Pauline de Charmilles, only daughter of one of 
the proudest aristocrats in France ! I shuddered, — and 
an involuntary groan escaped my lips. Clasping her 
hands, she raised them to me in fresh entreaty. 

" You will be gentle, Gaston ! — you will have mercy ? " 

The tension of my nerves relaxed, — the scalding 
moisture of unfailing tears blinded my eyes — and I gave 
vent to a long and bitter sigh. 

" Give me time, Pauline ! " I answered huskily. 
" Give me time ! you ask much of me, — and I have never 
— like your lover — played the part of samt or angel. I 
am nothing but a man, with all a man's passions roused 
to their deadliest sense of wrong, — do not expect from 
me more than man's strength is capable of ! And I 
have loved you ! — my God ! — how I have loved you ! — 
far, far more deeply than you ever guessed ! Pauline, 
Pauline ! — my love was honorably set upon you ! — I 
would not have wronged you by so much as one unruly 
thought ! You were to me more sacred than the Virgin's 
statue in her golden nook at incense time ; you were my 
God's light on earth — my lily of heaven — my queen — 
my life — my eternity — my all ! Pauline, Pauline ! " — and 
my voice trembled more and more as she hid her face in 
her hands and wept convulsively. " Alas, you cannot 
realize what you have done — not yet ! You cannot in the 
blindness of your passion see how the world will slowly 
close upon you like a dark prison w^herein to expiate 
in tears and pain your sin, — you do not yet comprehend 
how the kindly faces you have known from childhood will 
turn from you in grief and scorn, — how friends will 
shrink from and avoid you, — and how desolate your days 
will be, — too desolate, Pauline, for even your betrayer's 
love to cheer ! For love that begins in crime ends in 
destruction, — its evil recoils on the heads of those that 
have yielded to its insidious tempting, — and thinking of 
this, Pauline, I can pity you ! pity you more, aye, a thou- 
sand times more than I should pity you if you were 
dead ! I would rather you had died, unhappy child, 
than lived to be dishonored 1 " 

She made no reply, but still covered her face, and still 
wept on, — and, steadying my nerves, I bent down and 
raised her by gentle force from the ground. The clock 



loS WORMWOOD, 

struck eleven as I did so, — she had been two hours with 

me, — it was full time she should return as quickly as 
possible to her home. Acting promptly on this idea, I 
gave her her hat and cloak. 

" Put these on ! " I said. 

She removed her hands from her eyes — such woeful 
eyes ! — all swollen and red with weeping, and tremblingly 
obeyed me — her breast heaving with the sobs she could 
not restrain. 

" Now come with me, — softly ! " And I took her ice- 
cold hand in mine and led her out of the room and across 
the darkened passage, where, stopping a moment to 
hastily don my overcoat and hat, I cautiously opened the 
street-door without making the least noise. The strong 
wind blew gusts of rain in our faces, — and I strove to 
shelter the shivering girl as best I could with my own 
body, as I closed the door again behind us as quietly as 
I had opened it. Then I turned to her with formal 
courtesy. 

" You must walk a little way, I am afraid, — it will not 
be wise to call a carriage up to this very house, — your 
departure might be noticed." 

She came down the steps at once like a blind creature, 
seeming scarcely to feel her way, and as I observed her 
feebleness, and the tottering, swaying movement of her 
limbs, my own wretchedness was suddenly submerged in 
an overwhelming wave of intense compassion for her fate. 
Involuntarily I stretched out my hand to save her from 
stumbling, and, in the very extremity of my anguish, I 
cried — 

" Oh, Pauline ! oh, poor little pretty Pauline ! " 

At this she looked up wildly — and with a low shudder- 
ing wail fled to my arms and clung there like a scared 
bird, panting for breath. I held her to my heart for one 
despairing minute — then, — remembering all, — I strove 
for fresh mastery over my feelings, and, putting her gently 
yet firmly away from my embrace, I supported her with 
one arm as we walked some little distance along the 
flooded pavement in the full opposing force of the wind. 
As soon as I saw a disengaged close carriage, I hailed its 
driver, and, assisting Pauline into the vehicle, I took my 
own place beside her. We were soon borne along rapidly 
in the direction of the Comte de Charrailles' residence \ 



IVOKMIVOOD. 107 

and then my trembling half-weeping companion seemed 
to awake to new fears. 

" What are you going to do, Gaston ? " she asked, in a 
nervous whisper. 

" Nothing ! " 

" Nothing?" she echoed, her white face gleaming like 
the face of a ghost, in the yellow glare of the carriage 
lamps. 

" Nothing — except to see you home in safety, — and 
afterwards to return home myself." 

" But — Silvion " she faltered. 

"Do not be alarmed, mademoiselle ! " I said, my wrath 
rousing itself anew at the bare mention of his name. " I 
shall not seek him to-night at any rate. It is too late to 
arrange the scores between us ! " 

" Gaston ! " she murmured sobbingly. " I have asked 
you to have mercy ! " 

" And I have said that you must give me time," I 
responded. " I must think out what will be best for me 
to do. Meanwhile — for the immediate present — your 
secret is safe with me, — I shall tell no one of your — your 
" I could not finish the sentence — the word " dis- 
honor " choked me in the utterance. 

" But you will break off our engagement, will you 
not ? " she implored anxiously. *' You will tell them all 
that we have changed our minds ? — that we cannot be 
married ? " 

I regarded her fixedly. 

" I do not know that I shall put it in that way," I 
answered. " To justify my own conduct in breaking off 
our marriage, I shall of course find it necessary to tell 
your father the cause of the rupture." 

She shuddered back into the corner of the carriage. 

" Oh, it will kill him ! " she moaned. " It will kill him, 
I am sure ! " 

" One murder more or less scarcely matters in such a 
wholesale slaughter of true tenderness," I said coldly. 
" You have chosen your own fate, Pauline — and you must 
abide by it. Will your lover marry you, do you think, 
when you are free ? " 

She looked up quickly, her eyes lightened by a sudden 
hope. 

" Yes ; he will — he must ! He has sworn it I " 



io8 WORMWOOD. 

" Then bid him fulfil his oath at once," I rejoined. 
" Bid him set you right as far as he can in the eyes of the 
world before it is too late. If this is done, your difficulty 
is almost dispensed with, — you need trouble yourself no 
more about 7Jie or my life's ruin ! The fact of a private 
marriage having been consummated between you and M. 
Guidel will put an end to all discussion, so far as / am 
concerned ! " 

A weary puzzled expression crossed her features, — and 
I smiled bitterly. I knew — I felt instinctively that he — 
after the fashion of all traitor-seducers of women — would 
not be in very eager haste to marry his victim. 

Just then we turned into the broad beautiful avenue 
where the Comte de Charmilles had his stately, but now 
(alas ! had he but known it !) ruined home. 

" Listen ! " I said, bending towards her and empha- 
sizing my words impressively. " I will release you from 
your engagement to me if Silvion Guidel consents to wed 
you immediately, without a day's delay ! Failing this, I 
must, as I told you, have time to consider as to what will 
be the wisest and best course of action for all in this 
terrible affair." 

The carriage stopped ; we descended, — and I paid 
and dismissed the driver. Murmuring feebly that she 
would go through the garden and enter the house by the 
large French window of the morning-room through which 
she had secretly made her exit, Pauline wrapped her 
mantle closely round her, and there in the storm and rain, 
raised her sorrowful blue eyes once more to mine in pas- 
sionate appeal. 

" Pity me, Gaston ! " she said — " pity me ! Think of 
my shame and misery ! — and think, oh think, Gaston, 
that you can save me if you will ! God make you kind 
to me ! " 

And, with a faint sobbing sigh, she waved her hand 
feebly in farewell, and entering the great armorial gates, 
glided round among the trees of the garden, and, like a 
flitting phantom, disappeared. 

Left alone, I stood on the pavement like one in a 
dazed dream. The icy rain beat upon me, the wild 
gale tore at me, — and I was not clearly conscious of 
either sleet or wind. Once I stared up at the bhck 
sky where the scurrying clouds were chasing each other 



WOKMIVOOD. 109 

in mountainous heaps of rapid and dark confusion, — - 
and in tiiat one glance, the h'ghtning Irulli seemed to ilash 
upon me with more deadly vividness than ever, — the 
truth that for me the world was at an end ! Life, and the 
joys and hopes and ambitions that make life desirable, all 
these were over — there was nothing left for me to do but 
to drag on in sick and dull monotony the mechanical bus- 
iness of the daily routine of waking, eating, drinking, sleep- 
ing, — a mere preservation of existence, when existence 
had forever lost its charm ! I was roused from my stupefied 
condition by the noise of wheels, and, looking up, saw the 
Comte de Charmilles' carriage coming, — he and his wife 
were returning from the theatre, — and in case they should 
perceive me outside their house, where I still lingered, I 
strode swiftly away, neither knowing nor caring in which 
direction I bent my steps. Presently I found myself on 
the familiar route of the Champs Elysdes, — the trees there 
were tossing their branches wildly and groaning at the 
pitiless destruction wreaked upon their tender spring 
frondage by the cruel blast, — and, weary in body and 
mind, I sat down on one of the more sheltered seats, 
utterly regardless of the fact that I was wet through and 
shivering, and try to come to some sort of understanding 
with myself concerning the disaster that had befallen me. 
And as I thought, one by one, of the various dreams of 
ecstasy, bright moments and love-enraptured days that had 
lately been mine, I am not ashamed to say that I shed 
tears. A man may weep when he is alone surely ! — and I 
wept for the bitterest loss the human soul can ever know, 
— the loss of love, and the loss of good faith in the honor of 
men and women. The slow drops that blinded my sight 
were hot as fire, — they burned my eyes as they welled 
forth, and my throat ached with the pain of them, — but in 
a certain measure they helped to clear and calm my brain, 
— the storm of wrath and sorrow in my mind quieted itself 
by degrees, — and I was able to realize not only the extent 
of my own cureless grief, but also that of the unhappy 
girl whom over and over again I had sworn I would die 
to serve ! 

Poor, poor Pauline ! How ill she looked, — how pale — 
how sad ! Poor little child ! — for she was not much more 
than a child ; — and thinking of her youth, her impulsive- 
ness, and her unutterable misery, my heart softened more 



110 WORMWOOD, 

and more towards her. She loved Silvion Guidel — Silvion 
Guidel loved her ; — they were both young, both beautiful, 
— and they had not been strong enough to resist the 
insidious attraction of each other's fairness. They had 
sinned, — they had fallen, — they were ashamed, — they re- 
pented ; — they sought my pardon, — and I — should I with- 
hold it ? or should I, like a brave man, make light of my 
own wrong, my own suffering, and heap coals of fire upon 
their heads by my free forgiveness, — my magnanimous aid, 
to help them out of the evil plight into which they had wil- 
fully wandered ? I asked myself this question many times. 
I now understood the strange demeanor of Guidel on that 
night when he had asked me whether I could forgive him if 
he had sinned greatly ! His conscience had tormented him 
all through, — he had surely suffered as well as sinned ! 

Pressing one hand hard over my eyes, and choking 
back those foolish tears of mine, I strove manfully to con- 
sider the whole wretched story from the most merciful 
point of view possible to my nature. I had been brought 
up under my father's vigilant care, on lines of broad 
thought, strict honor, and practical, not theoretical, phi- 
losophy, — his chief idea of living nobly being this, — to do 
good always when good could be done, and when not, at 
at any rate to refrain from doing evil. If I believed in 
these precepts at all, now, surely, was the time to act upon 
them. I could never win back Pauline's love, — that had 
been stolen, or else had gone of its own free will to my 
rival, — but I had it in my power to make her happy and 
respected once more. How t Nothing was easier. In 
the first place I would go to the good Pere Vaudron, and 
tell him all the truth, in confidence ; — I would ask him to 
see that the civic rite of marriage was performed at once 
between his nephew and Pauline secretly, — I would aid 
the wedded lovers with money, should they require it, to 
leave Paris immediately, — and when once their departure 
was safely assured, I would break the whole thing to the 
Comte de Charmilles, and accept whatever wrath he 
chose to display on my own devoted head. Thus, I should 
win Pauline's eternal gratitude, — her parents would in time 
become reconciled to their change of a son-in-law, — and 
all would be well. I, — only I would be the lasting sufferer 
— but should not a true man be ready and willing to 
sacrifice himself, if by so doing, he can render the one 



IVOKAnVOOD. 



Ill 



woman he loves in all the world, happy ? Still, — on the 
other hand, there was the more natural plan of vengeance, 
— one word to Pauline's father, and she would be shamed 
and disgraced beyond recall, — I could then challenge Sil- 
vion Guidbl and do my best to kill him, in which effort I 
should most probably succeed, and so bring misery on 
poor old Vaudron and his simple folk in Brittany, — I 
could do all this, and yet, after all was done, I myself 
should be as wretched as ever ! I thought and thought, 
I pondered till my brows ached, — the good and the evil 
side of my nature fought desperately together, while my 
consciousness, like a separate watchful person apart, 
seemed totally unable to decide which would win. It was 
a sore contest ! — the struggle of the elements around me 
was not more fierce than the struggle in my own tormented 
soul, — but through all, the plaintive voice of Pauline, — 
Pauline whom I still loved, alas ! — rang in my ears with 
that last sobbing cry, — '' Pity me, Gaston ! God make 
you kind to me ! "; — till gradually, very gradually, I won 
the mastery over my darker passions, — won it with a 
sense of warm triumph such as none can understand save 
him that has been tempted and has steadily overcome 
temptation. I resolved that I would save Pauline from 
the consequences of her rash blind error, — and so, at any 
rate, be at peace with the Eternal Witness of Heaven and 
my own conscience ! This I decided, finally and fixedly, 
— determining to pursue my plan for the re-establishment 
of the honor and safety of the woman who trusted me, 
the very first thing the next day, — and I would say noth- 
ing to any one, not even to my father, — till my work of 
forgiveness and help was carried out and completed be- 
yond recall ! 

Here let me pause. Do you understand, you, whoso- 
ever you are, that read these pages, — do you thoroughly 
understand my meaning ? If not, let me impress it upon 
you plainly, once and for all, — for I would not have the 
dullest wits misjudge me at this turning point of time ! 
I had absolutely made up my mind, — mark you ! — to do 
my best for her who had played me false ! Absolutely 
and unflinchingly. For I loved her in spite of her 
treachery ! — I cared to be remembered in her prayers ! — 
I who, in the hot fervor of my adoration for her beauty, 
had declared that I would die for her, was now willing to 



112 WORMWOOD. 

carry out that vow, — to die spiritually — to crush all my 
own clamorous affections and desires for her sake, that 
all might be well with her in days present and to come ! 
Remember, I was willing — and not only willing, but ready ! 
Not because I seek pity from you, do I ask it, — world's 
pity is a weak thing that none but cowards need. I only 
want justice, — aye ! if it be but the mere glimmering jus- 
tice of your slowest, sleepiest comprehension, — give me 
enough of it to grasp this one fact — namely, that on the 
night of the bitterest suffering of my life — the night on 
which I learned my own betrayal, I had prepared myself 
to forgive the unhappy child who had wronged me, as 
freely, as entirely, as I then hoped, before God, to be, in 
my turn, forgiven i 



WORMWOOD. 



"3 



xir. 

I DO not know how long I sat on that seat in the Champs 
Elysees, with the tempestuous rain beating down upon 
me, the desperate coniiict I had had with my own worser 
self had rendered me insensible to the flight of time. So 
numbed was I with outward cold and inward miser}^ — so 
utterly blind to all external surroundings, that I was as 
startled as though a pistol-shot had been fired close to 
me when a hand fell on my shoulder, and a harsh, half- 
laughing voice exclaimed — 

" Gaston Beauvais, by all the gods and goddesses ! 
Gaston Beauvais drenched as a caught rat in a relent- 
less housekeeper's pail ! What the devil are you doing 
here at this time of night, mo7i beau riche ? You, with 
limitless francs at your command, and good luck shower- 
ing its honey-dew persistently on your selected fortunate 
head, — what may be your object in thus fraternizing with 
the elements and striving to match them groan for groan, 
scowl for scowl ? By my faith ! — I can hardly believe 
that this soaked and dripping bundle of good clothes 
spoilt is actually yourself ! " 

I looked up, forced a smile, and held out my hand. I 
recognized the speaker, — indeed he was too remark- 
able a character in his way to be for an instant mis- 
taken. All Paris knew Andre Gessonex, — a poor 
wretch of an artist, who painted pictures that were 
too extraordinary and risque for any respectable house- 
holder to buy, and who eked out a bare living by his 
decollete sketches, in black and white, of all the noted 
danseuses and burlesque actresses in the city. His 
bizarre figure clad in its threadbare and nondescript 
garb was familiar to every frequenter of the Boulevards, 
— and, in truth, it was eccentric enough to attract 
the most casual stranger's attention. His pinched and 
shrunken legs were covered with the narrowest possible 



114 ^ WORMWOOD, 

trousers, which, by frequent turning up to make the best 
of the worn ends, had now become so short for him that 
they left almost a quarter of a yard of flaring red sock 
exposed to view, — his thin jacket, the only one he had 
for both winter and summer, was buttoned tightly across 
his chest to conceal the lack of the long-ago pawned 
waistcoat, — a collar, with very large, unstarched soiled 
ends, flapped round his skinny throat, relieved by a 
brilliant strip of red flannel which served as tie, — 
he kept his hair long in strict adherence to true ar- 
tistic tradition, and on these bushy, half-gray, always dis- 
ordered locks he wore a very battered hat of the " brig- 
and " shape, which had been many times inked over 
to hide its antique rustiness, and which he took the 
greatest pains to set airily on one side, to suggest, as 
he once explained, indifference to the world, and gay 
carelessness as to the world's opinions. Unlucky devil ! 
— I had always pitied him from my heart, — and many a 
twenty-franc piece of mine had found its way into his 
pocket. A cruel fate had bestowed on him genius with- 
out common-sense, and the perfectly natural result of 
such an endowment was, that he starved. He was full 
of good and even fine ideas, — there were times when he 
seemed to sparkle all over with felicity of wit and poetry 
of expression, — many men liked him, and not only liked 
him, but strove to assist him substantially, without ever 
succeeding in their charitable endeavors. For Andre 
was one of Creation's incurables, — neither money nor 
advice ever benefited him one iota. Give him the com- 
mission to paint a picture, — and he would produce a 
Titanesque canvas, too big for anything but a cathedral, 
and on that canvas he would depict the airiest nude 
personages disporting themselves in such a frankly in- 
delicate manner, that the intending purchaser withdrew 
his patronage in shuddering haste and alarm, and fled 
without leaving so much as the odor of a franc behind. 
Thus the poor fellow was always unfortunate, and when 
taken to task and told that his ill-luck was entirely his 
own fault, he would assume an air of the most naive 
bewilderment. 

" You amaze me ! " he would say. *' You really amaze 
me ! I am not to blame if these people who want to buy 
pictures have no taste ! I cannot paint Dutch interiors, 



IVOKMIVOOD. 115 

•—the carrot waitincj to be peeled on the table, — the fat 
old woman cutting onions for the pot-au-fcu^ — the cen- 
tenarian gentleman with a perpetual cold in his head, 
who bends over a brazier to warm his aged nose, while a 
dog and two kittens gaze up confidingly at his wrinkled 
hands, — this is not in my line ! I can only produce 
grand art ! — classical subjects, — Danae in her brazen 
tower, — Theseus and Ariadne — the amours of Cybele with 
Atys — or the triumphs of Venus ; — I cannot descend to 
the level of ordinary vulgar minds ! Let me be poor — 
let me starve — but let me keep my artistic conscience ! 
A grateful posterity may recognize what this frivolous 
age condemns ! " 

Such was the man who now stood before me like a 
gaunt spectre in the rain, his dull peering eyes brighten- 
ing into a faint interest as he fixed them on mine. His 
face betokened the liveliest surprise and curiosity at 
meeting me out there at night and in such weather, and I 
could not at once master my voice sufficiently to answer 
him. He waited one or two minutes, and then clapped 
me again on the shoulder. 

" Have you lost your speech, Beauvais, or your 
strength, or your courage, or what ? You look alarm- 
ingly ill ! — wdll you take my arm "i " 

There was a friendly solicitude about him that touched 
me, — another time I might have hesitated to be seen with 
such an incongruous figure as he was, — he, whose mock- 
tragic manner and jaunty style of walk had been mimicked 
and hooted at by all the little gmrins of Paris, — but the 
hour was late, and I felt so utterly wretched, so thrown 
out, as it were, from all sympathy, so destitute of all hope, 
that I was glad of even this forlorn starveling's company, 
and I, therefore, took his proffered arm, — an arm the 
very bone of which I could feel sharply protruding 
through the thin worn sleeve. 

" I am rather out of my usual line ! " I then said, 
striving to make light of my condition. " Sitting out in 
the rain on a dreary night like this is certainly not amus- 
ing. But — when one is in trouble " 

" Trouble ! — Ah ! " exclaimed Gessonex, lifting his dis- 
engaged hand, clenching it, and shaking it at the frowning 
sky with a defiant air. " Trouble is the fishing-net of the 
amiable Deity up yonder, whom none of us can see, and 



Il6 WORMWOOD. 

whom few of us want to know ! Down it drops, that big 
black net, out of the clouds, quite unexpectedly, and we 
are all dragged into it, struggling and sprawling for dear 
life, just like the helpless fish we ourselves delight to 
catch and kill and cook and devour ! We are all little 
gods down here, each in our own way, — and the great 
One above (if there is one !) can only be an enlarged 
pattern of our personalities, — for, according to the Bible, 
* He made us in His own image ! ' And so you are 
caught, 7non ami ? That is bad ! — but let me not forget 
to mention, that there are a few large holes in the net 
through which those that have gold about them can 
easily slip and escape scot free ! " 

Poor Gessonex ! He, like all hungry folk, imagined 
money to be a cure for every evil. 

" My good fellow," I said gently, " there are some 
griefs that can follow and persecute to the very death 
even Croesus among his bags of bullion. I begin to 
think poverty is one of the least of human misfortunes." 

" Absolutely you are right ! " declared Gessonex, with 
an air of triumph. " It is a sor/*" of thing you so soon get 
accustomed to ! It sits upon one easily, like an old coat ! 
You cease to desire a dinner if you never have it ! — it 
is quite extraordinary how the appetite suits itself to 
circumstances, and puts up with a cigar at twenty 
centimes instead of a filet for one franc ! — the Jilet is 
actually not missed ! And what a number of remarkable 
cases we have had shown to us lately in the field of 
science, of men existing for a long period of time, without 
any nourishment save water ! I have been deeply inter- 
ested in that subject, — I believe in the system thoroughly, 
— I have tried it (for my own amusement of course !) 
Yes ! — I have tried it for several days together ! I find 
it answers very well ! — it is apt to make one feel quite 
light upon one's feet, — almost aerial in fact, and ready to 
fly, as if one were disembodied ! — most curious and 
charming ! " 

My heart smote me, — the man was starving and my 
purse was full. I pressed his meagre arm more closely, 
and for the time forgot my own sorrows in consideration 
for his needs. 

" Let us go and sup somewhere," I said hastily. 
** Any place near at hand will do. A basin of hot soup 



IVOA'MWOOD. 



J17 



will take oil tlie chill of this downpour, — I am positively 
wet through ! " 

*' You are, mon ami, — that is a lamentable fact I " 
rejoined Gcssonex affably — " and, — apart from the con- 
dition of those excellent clothes of yours, which are 
ruined, I regret to observe, — you w^ill most hkely wake 
up to-morrow with a violent cold. And a cold is not 
becoming — it spoils the face of even a pretty woman. 
So that if you really believe the hot soup will be bene- 
ficial to you, — (as far as I am concerned, I find the cold 
water nourishment singularly agreeable !) why, I will 
escort you to a very decent restaurant, where you can 
procure a really superb bouillon — superb, I assure you ! — 
I have often inhaled the odor of \\. en passant /^^ 

And, quickening his steps unconsciously, out of the 
mere natural impulse of the hungry craving he could not 
quite repress, he walked with me out of the Champs 
Elysees and across the Place de la Concorde, — thence 
over one of the bridges spanning the Seine, and so on, 
till we reached a dingy little building in a side street, 
over which, in faded paint, was inscribed *' Grand Caf^ 
BoNHOMME. Restaurant pour tout le monde." The 
glass doors were shut, and draped with red curtains, 
through which the interior lights flung a comfortable glow 
on the sloppy roadway, and Gessonex pointed to this 
with the most fervent admiration. 

" What a charm there is about the color red ! " he 
exclaimed enthusiastically. " It is so suggestive of 
warmth and brilliancy ! It is positively fascinating ! — 
and in my great picture of Apollo chasing Daphne, I 
should be almost tempted to use folds of red drapery 
were it not for the strict necessity of keeping the figures 
nude. But the idea of a garmented god fills me with 
horror ! — as well paint Adam and Eve decorously adorned 
with fig-leaves before the fall ! — that is what a contem- 
porary of mine has just done, — ha ha! Fig-leaves before 
the fall ! Excellent ! — ah, very amusing ! " 

Opening the cafe doors he beckoned me to follow. I 
did so half mechanically, my only idea for the moment 
being that he, Gessonex, should get a good meal for 
once, — I knew that I myself would not be able to taste 
anything. There were only two or three people in the 
place 5 — a solitary waiter, whom I had perceived comb'. 



Ii8 IVOKMWOOD. " 

ing his hair carefully in the background, came forward 
to receive instructions, and cleared a table for us in a 
rather retired corner where we at once sat down. I then 
ordered soup, and whatever else was ready to be had hot 
and savory, while Andre gingerly lifted his brigand hat 
and placed it on a convenient nail above him, using so 
much precaution in this action, that I suppose he feared 
it might come to pieces in his hands. Then, running his 
fingers through his matted locks, he rested his elbows 
comfortably on the table, and surveyed me smilingly. 

" Mon cher Beauvais," he said, " I feel as if there were 
a mystical new bond between us ! I always liked you, 
as you know, — but you were removed from me by an im- 
mense gulf of difference, — this difference being that you 
were never in trouble, and I, as you must be aware, 
always was and always am ! But do not imagine that it 
is pleasant to me to see you wriggling fish-like on the 
bon Dieu's disagreeably sharp hook of calamity — au 
contraire^ it infinitely distresses me, — but still, if anything 
can make men brothers it is surely a joint partnership in 
woe ! All the same, Beauvais " — and he lowered his 
voice a little — '' I am sincerely sorry to find you so cast 
down ! " 

I made a mute sign of gratitude, — he was looking at 
me intently, stroking his peaked beard the while. 

"Nothing financially wrong?" he hinted delicately, 
after a pause. 

" My good Andre ! — Nothing ! " 

" I am glad of that ! " he rejoined sedately, " for nat- 
urally I could be no sort of service to you in any ques- 
tion of cash. A money difficulty always appeals to me 
in vain ! But for any private vexation of a purely 
emotional and yet excessively irritating nature, I think I 
know a cure ! " 

I forced a smile. " Indeed ! " 

He nodded gravely, and his eyes dilated with a cer- 
tain peculiar bright limpidness that I and others had 
often noticed in them whenever the " mad painter," as he 
was sometimes called, was about to be more than usually 
eloquent. 

" For the heart's wide wounds which bleed inter- 
nally ; — for che grief of a lost love which can never be 
regained," he said slowly and dreamily; "for the sting 



IVORAflVOOD. 



119 



of remorse, and the teasii!;; persecutions of conscience, 
— for all these, and more than these, 1 can find a rem- 
edy ! For the poison of memory 1 can provide an an- 
tidote, — a blessed balm that soothes the wronged 
spirit into total forgetfulness of its injury, and opens 
before the mind a fresh and wondrous field of vision, 
where arc found glories that the world knows nothing of, 
and for the enjoyment of which a man might be well con- 
tent to starve and suffer, and sacrifice everything — even 
love ! " 

His harsh voice had grown musical, — a faint smile 
rested on his thin pale lips, — and I gazed at him in vague 
surprise and curiosity. 

" What are you poetizing about now, Gessonex ? " I 
asked half banteringly. " What magic Elixir Vitae thus 
excites your enthusiasm ? " 

He made no answer, as just then the supper arrived, 
and, rousing himself quickly as from a reverie, his eyes 
lost their preternatural light, and all his interest be- 
came centred in the food before him. Poor fellow ! — 
how daintily he ate, feigning reluctance, yet lingering 
over every morsel ! How he rated the waiter for not 
bringing him a damask serviette, — how haughtily he 
complained of the wine being corked, — and how 
thoroughly he enjoyed playing the part of a fastidious 
epicure and fine gentleman ! My share in the repast was 
a mere pretence, and he perceived this, though he re- 
frained from any comment upon my behavior while the 
meal was yet in progress. But as soon as it was ended, 
and he was smoking the cigarette I had offered him, he 
leaned across the table and addressed me once more in a 
low confidential tone. 

" Beauvais, you have eaten nothing ! " 

I sighed impatiently. '''' Mon chei-^ I have no appetite.*' 

*' Yet you are wet through, — you shiver ? " 

I shrugged my shoulders. " Soitl " 

" You will not even smoke ? " 

" To oblige you, I will " — and I opened my case of 
cigarettes and lit one forthwith, hoping by this com- 
plaisance to satisfy his anxiety on my behalf. But he 
rose suddenly, saying no word to me, and crossing over 
to where the waiter stood, talked with him very earnestly 
and emphatically for a minute or two. Then he returnecl 



120 WORMIVOOD, 

leisurely to his seat opposite me, and I looked at him 
inquiringly. 

" What have you been ordering ? A cognac ? " 

" No." 

" What then ? " 

" Oh, nothing ! only — absinthe^ 

" Absinthe ! " I echoed. " Do you like that stuff ? " 

His eyes opened wide, and flashed a strangely piercing 
glance at me. 

" Like it ? I love it ! And you ? " 

" I have never tasted it." 

" Never tasted it ! " exclaimed Gessonex amazedly. 
" Mon Dieu ! You, a born and bred Parisian, have never 
tasted absinthe? " 

I smiled at his excitement. 

" Never ! I have seen others draining it often, — ^but I 
have not liked the look of it somehow. A repulsive color 
to me, — that medicinal green ! " 

He laughed a trifle nervously, and his hand trembled. 
But he gave no immediate reply, for at that moment 
the waiter placed a flacon of the drink in question on 
the table, together with the usual supply of water and 
tumblers. Carefully preparing and stirring the opaline 
mixture, Gessonex filled the glasses to the brim, and 
pushed one across to me. I made a faint sign of rejec- 
tion. He laughed again, in apparent amusement at my 
hesitation. 

" By Venus and Cupid, and all the dear old heathen 
deities who are such remarkably convenient myths to take 
one's oath upon," he said, " I hope you will not compel 
me to consider you a fool, Beauvais ! What an idea that 
is of yours, — * medicinal green ' ! Think of melted emer- 
alds instead ! There, beside you, you have the most mar- 
vellous cordial in all the world, — drink and you will find 
your sorrows transmuted — yourself transformed ! Even 
if no better result be obtained than escaping from the 
chill you have incurred in this night's heavy drenching, 
that is surely something ! Life without absinthe ! — I 
cannot imagine it ! For me it would be impossible ! I 
should hang, drown, or shoot myself into infinitude, out of 
sheer rage at the continued cruelty and injustice of the 
world, — but with this divine nectar of Olympus I can 
4efy misfortune and laugh at poverty, as though these 



IVORMIVOOD. 121 

were the merest bagatelles I Come ! — to your health, mon 
brave / Drink with me ! " 

He raised his glass glimmering pallidly in the light, — 
his words, his manner, fascinated me, and a curious thrill 
ran th'^ough my veins. There was something spectral in 
his expression too, as though the skeleton of the man had 
become suddenly visible beneath its fleshly covering, — as 
though Death had for a moment peered through the veil 
of Life. I fixed my eyes doubtingly on the pale-green 
liquid whose praises he thus sang — had it indeed such a 
potent charm ? Would it still the dull aching at my 
heart, — the throbbing in my temples, — the sick weariness 
and contempt of living, that had laid hold upon me like a 
fever since I knew Pauline was no longer my own ? Would 
it give me a brief respite from the inner fret of torment- 
ing thought ? It might ! — and, slowly lifting the glass to 
my lips, I tasted it. It was very bitter and nauseous, — 
and I made a wry face of disgust as I set it down. The 
watchful Gessonex touched my arm. 

" Again ! " he whispered eagerly, with a strange smile. 
" Once again ! It is like vengeance, — bitter at first, but 
sweet at last ! Mon cher, if you were not, — as I see you 
are, — a prey to aflfliction, I would not offer you the knowl- 
edge of this sure consolation, — for he that is not sad needs 
no comfort. But supposing — I only guess, of course ! — • 
supposing your mind to be chafed by the ever present 
memory of some wrong — some injury — some treachery — 
even some love-betrayal, — why then, I fail to see why you 
should continue to suffer when the remedy for all such 
suffering is /z^r^/ " And he sipped the contents of his 
own glass w'ith an air of almost inspired ecstasy. 

I looked at him fixedly. An odd tingling sensation was 
in my blood, as though it had been suddenly touched by 
an inward fire. 

" You mean to tell me," I said incredulously, *' that 
Absinthe, — which I have heard spoken of as the curse of 
Paris, — is a cure for all human ills ? That it will not only 
ward off physical cold from the body, but keep out haunt- 
ing trouble from the mind? Mon ami, yo\x rave! — such 
a thing is not possible J If it could quench mad passion, 
— if it could kill love ! — if it could make of my heart a 
stone, instead of a tortured, palpitating sentient substance 
— there ! — forgive me ! I am talking at random of \ 



122 IVORMWOOD. 

know not what, — I have been cruelly betrayed, Gessonexl 
and I wish to God I could forget my betrayal ! " 

My words had broken from me involuntarily, and he 
heard them with an attentive expression of amiable half- 
melancholy solicitude. But in reply he pointed to the 
glass beside me. 

" Drink ! " he said. 

Drink ! — Well, why not } I could see no earthly rea- 
son for hesitating over such a trifle, — I would taste the 
nauseous fluid again, I thought, if only to satisfy my com- 
panion, — and I at once did so. Heavens ! — it was now 
delicious to my palate — exquisitely fine and delicate as 
balm, — and in my pleasurable amazement I swallowed 
half the tumblerful * readily, conscious of a new and in- 
describably delightful sense of restorative warmth and com- 
fort pervading my whole system. I felt that Gessonex 
observed me intently, and, meeting his gaze I smiled. 

" You are quite right, Andre ! " I told him. " The 
second trial is the test of flavor. It is excellent ! " 

And without taking any more thought as to what I 
was doing, I finished the entire draught, re-lit my cigar- 
ette which had gone out, and began to smoke con- 
tentedly, while Gessonex re-filled my glass. 

" Now you will soon be a man again ! " he exclaimed 
joyously. " To the devil with all the botherations of life, 
say I ! You are too well off in this world's goods, mon 
cher^ to allow yourself to be seriously worried about any- 
thing, — and I am truly glad I have persuaded you to try 
my favorite remedy for the kicks of fortune, because I 
like you ! Moreover, to speak frankly, I owe you several 
excellent dinners, — the one of to-night being particularly 
welcome, in spite of what I said in favor of the cold water 
nourishment, — and the only good I can possibly do you 
in return for your many acts of friendship is to introduce 
you to the ' Fairy with the Green Eyes ' — as this ex- 
quisite nectar has been poetically termed. It is a charm- 
ing fairy ! — one wave of the opal wand, and sorrow is con- 
reniently guillotined ! " 

I let him run on uninterruptedly, — I myself was too 
drowsily comfortable to speak. I watched the smoke of 
my cigarette curling up to the ceiling in little dusky 

* A glass of Absinthe i^^^oxifasting is sufficient to cause temporary 
delirium. 



wo A' Af WOOD. 123 

wreaths, — they seemed to take phosphorescent gleams of 
color as they twisted round and round and melted away. 
A magical period of sudden and complete repose had been 
granted to me, — I had ceased to think of Pauline, — of 
Silvion Guid^l — or of any one incident of my life or sur- 
roundings, — all my interest was centred in those rising 
and disappearing smoky rings ! I drank more absinthe, 
with increasing satisfaction and avidity, — previous to tast- 
ing it I had been faint and cold and shivering, — now I 
was thoroughly warm, agreeably languid, and a trifle 
sleepy. I heard Gessonex talking to me now and then, 
there were moments when he seemed to become eloquently 
energetic in his denunciations of something or somebody, 
— but his voice sounded far off, like a voice in a dream, 
and I paid very little heed to him, only nodding occasion- 
ally whenever he appeared to expect an answer. I was 
in that hazy condition of mind common to certain phases 
of intoxication, when the drunkard is apt to think he is 
thinking, — though really no distinctly comprehensible 
thought is possible to his befogged and stupefied brain. 
Yet I understood well enough what Gessonex said about 
love ; he got on that subject, heaven knows how, and 
launched against it an arrowy shower of cynicism. 

" What a fool a man is," he exclaimed, " to let himself 
be made a slave for life, all for the sake of a pretty face 
that in time is bound to grow old and ugly ! Love is 
only a hot impulse of the blood, and like any other fever 
can be cooled and kept down easily if one tries. It is a 
starving sort of ailment too, — one does not get fat on it. 
Love emaciates both soul and body — but hate, on the 
contrary, feeds ! I must confess that, for my own part, I 
have no sympathy with a lover, — but I adore a good hater ! 
To hate well is the most manly of attributes, — for there 
is so much in the world that merits hatred — so little that 
is worthy of love ! As for women — bah ! We begin our 
lives by believing them to be angels, — but we soon find 
out what painted, bedizened, falsely-smiling courtesans 
they all are at heart, — at least all I have ever met. I^ar- 
dieu ! I swear to you, Beauvais, I have never known a 
good woman ! " 

" Helas ! " I sighed gently, and smiled. " Fauvre 
Gessonex ! " 

*' And you ? " he demanded eagerly. 



124 WORMWOOD. 

A vision of a pure, pale, proud face, set like a classic 
cameo, in a frame of golden hair, and lightened into life 
by the steady brilliancy of two calm star-splendid eyes, 
flashed suddenly across my mind almost against my will, 
and I replied, half dreamily — 

" One woman I know both fair and wise, and also — I 
think — good." 

" You think /" laughed Gessonex, with a touch of wild- 
ness in his manner. " You only think ! — you do not fear I 
Yes ! — I sdij/ear ! Fear her, mon ami, if she is truly good, 
— for as sure as death the time will come when she will 
shame you ! There is no man pure enough to look upon 
the face of an innocent woman, and not know himself to 
be at heart a villain ! " 

I smiled again. What foolish fancies the fellow had to 
be sure ! He rambled on more or less incoherently, — 
while I sank deeper and deeper into a maze of indolent 
reverie. I was roused at last, however, by the respectful 
appeals of the \\x^di gar^on^ who irildly suggested that we 
should now take our leave, as it was past midnight, and 
they were desirous of closing the cafe. I got up sleepily, 
paid the reckoning, tipped our yawning attendant hand- 
somely, and walked, or rather reeled out of the place arm 
in arm with my companion, who, as soon as he found 
himself in the open street exposed once more to the furious 
rain which poured down as incessantly as ever, fell to 
rating the elements in the most abusive terms. 

^^ Sacre diable !^^ he exclaimed. "What abominable 
weather ! — Entirely unsuited to the constitution of a gentle- 
man ! Only rats, cats, and toads should be abroad on such 
a night, — and yet I — I, Andr^ Gessonex, the only painter 
in France with any genius, am actually compelled to 
walk home ! What vile injustice ! You, mon chef 
Beauvais, are more fortunate — God, or the gods, will per- 
mit you to drive ! The fiacre is at your service for one 
franc, twenty centimes, — the voiture de place iox two francs 
fifty ! Which will you choose i* — though the hour is so late 
that it is possible the brave cocker may not be forthcoming 
even when called." 

And he swaggered jauntily to the edge of the curbstone 
and looked up and down the nearly deserted street, I 
watching him curiously the while. An odd calmness 
possessed me, — some previously active motion in my 



WORMWOOD. 125 

brain seemed suddenly stopped, — and I was vaguely in- 
terested in trifles. For instance, there was a little pool in 
a hollow of the pavement at rny feet, and I found myself 
dreamily counting the big raindrops that plashed into it 
with the force of small falling pebbles ; — then, a certain 
change in the face of Gessonex excited my listless atten- 
tion, — his eyes were so feverishly brilliant that for the 
moment their lustre gave him a sort of haggard dare-devil 
beauty, that though wild and starved and faded, was yet 
strangely picturesque. I studied him coldly for a little 
space, — then moved close up to him and slipped a twenty- 
franc piece into his hand. His fingers closed on it 
instantly." 

" Drive home yourself, vion cher, if you can get a 
carriage," I said. ** As for me I shall walk." 

" Let the rich man trudge while the beggar rides ! " 
laughed Gessonex, pocketing his gold coin without re- 
mark, — he would have considered any expression of 
gratitude in the worst possible taste. "That is exactly 
what all the disappointed folk here below expect to do 
after death, Beauvais ! — to ride in coaches and six round 
Heaven and look down at their enemies walking the 
brimstone, miles in Hell ! What a truly Christian hope, 
is it not ? And so you will positively invite another 
drenching t Bieii ! — so then will I, — I can change my 
clothes when I get home ! " 

Unfortunate devil ! — he had no clothes to change, — I 
knew that well enough ! His road lay in an entirely 
different direction from mine, so I bade him good-night. 

"You are a different man now, Beauvais, are you not.-* " 
he said, as he shook hands. " The ' green fairy ' has cured 
you of your mind's distemper ? " 

" Was my mind distempered ? " I queried indifferently, 
wondering as I spoke why the lately incessant pulsation 
in my brain was now so stunned and still. " I forget ! — 
but 1 suppose it was ! Anyhow, whatever was the matter 
with me, I am now quite myself again." 

He laughed wildly. 

" Good ! I am glad of that ! As for me, I am never 
myself, — I am always somebody else ! Droll, is it not.'' 
The fact is " — and he lowered his voice to a confidential 
whisper — " I have had a singular experience in my life, 
— altogether rare and remarkable. I have killed myself 



126 IVORMWOOD. 

and attended my own funeral ! Yes, truly ! Candles, 
priests, black draperies, well-fed long-tailed horses, — totite 
la baraque^ — no sparing of expense, you understand ? 
My corpse was in an open shell — I have a curious objec- 
tion to shut-up coffins — open to the night it lay, with the 
stars staring down upon it — it had a young face then, — 
and one might easily believe that it had also had fine eyes. 
I chose white violets for the wreath just over the heart, — 
they are charming flowers, full of delicately suggestive 
odor, do you not find ? — and the long procession to the 
grave was followed by the weeping crowds of Paris. 
* Dead ! ' they cried, ' Our Gessonex ! the Raphael of 
France ! ' Oh, it was a rare sight, mon ami ! — Never was 
there such grief in a land before, — I wept myself for 
sympathy with my lamenting countrymen ! I drew aside 
till all the flowers had been thrown into the open grave, 
■ — for I was the sexton, you must remember ! — I waited 
till the cemetery was deserted and in darkness — and then 
I made haste to bury myself — piling the earth over my 
dead youth close and fast, levelling it well, and treading 
it down ! The Raphael of France ! — There he lay, I 
thought — and there he might remain, so far as I was 
concerned — he was only a genius, and as such was no 
earthly use to anybody. Good-bye and good riddance, I 
said, as I hurried away from that graveyard and became 
from henceforth somebody else! And do you know I 
infinitely prefer to be somebody else ? — it is so much less 
troublesome ! " 

These strange, incoherent sentences coursed off his lips 
with impetuous rapidity — his voice had a strained piteous 
pathos in it mingled with scorn, — and the intense light 
in his eyes deepened to a sort of fiery fury from which I 
involuntarily recoiled. His appellation of " mad " painter 
never seemed so entirely suited to him as now. But, 
mad or not mad, he was quick enough to perceive the 
instinctive shrinking movement I made, and laughing 
again, he again shook my hand cordially, lifted his bat- 
tered hat with an assumption of excessive gentility, and 
breaking into the most high-flown expressions of French 
courtesy, bade me once more farewell. I watched him 
walking along in his customary half-jaunty, half-tragic 
style till he had disappeared round a corner like a fan- 
tastic spectre vanishing in a nightmare, and then — then, 



WORMWOOD. 



127 



as though a flash of blinding fire had crossed my sight, it 
suddenly became clear to my mind u'/kjI lie Jiad doricfor 
me ! And as I realized it I could have shouted aloud in 
the semi-delirium of feverish intoxication that burnt my 
brain ! That subtle flavor — clinging to my palate — that 
insidious fluid creeping drop by drop through my veins — 
I knew what it was at last ! — the first infiltration of another 
life — the slow but sure transfusion of a strange and 
deadly bitterness into my blood, which once absorbed, 
must and would cling to me forever ! Absijithcur ! I 
have heard the name used, sometimes contemptuously, 
sometimes compassionately, — it meant — oh ! so much ! — 
and, like charity, covered such a multitude of sins ! On 
what a fine hair's-breadth of chance or opportunity one's 
destiny hangs after all ! To think of that miserable 
Andre Gessonex being an instrument of Fate seemed 
absurd ! — a starved vaurien and reprobate — a mere crazed 
fool ! — and yet — yet — my casual meeting with him had 
been foredoomed ! — it had given the Devil time to do 
good work, — to consume virtue in a breath and conjure 
up vice from the dead ashes — to turn a feeling heart to 
Stone — and to make of a man a fiend I 



zaS ^IVORMIVOOD. 



XIIT. 

I WENT home that night, not to sleep but to dream,— 
to dream, with eyes wide open and senses acutely con- 
scious. I knew I was in my own room and on my own 
bed, — I could almost count the attle gradations of light 
in the pale glow flung by the flickering night-lamp 
against the wall and ceiling, — I could hear the muffled 
*' tick-tick " of the clock in my father's chamber next 
to mine, — but though these every-day impressions were 
distinct and fully recognizable, 1 was still away from them 
all, — far far away in a shadowy land of strange surprises 
and miraculous events, — a land where beauty and terror, 
ecstasy and horror, divided the time between them. I 
was a prey to the most singular physical sensations ; — 
that curious numbed stillness in my brain, which I had 
previously felt without being able to analyze, had given 
place to a busy, swift, palpitating motion like the beat of 
a rapid pendulum, — and by degrees, as this so7nething 
swung to and fro, its vibrations seemed to enter into and 
possess every part of my body. My heart bounded to 
the same quick time, my nerves throbbed — my blood 
hurled itself, so to speak, through my veins like a fierce 
torrent, — and I lay staring at the white ceiling above me, 
and vaguely wondering at all the sights I saw, and the 
scenes in which I, as a sort of disembodied personality, 
took active part without stirring ! Here, for instance, 
was a field of scarlet poppies, — I walked knee-deep 
among them, inhaling the strong opium-odor of their 
fragile leaves, — they blazed vividly against the sky, and 
nodded drowsily to and fro in the languid wind. And 
between their brilliant clusters lay the dead ! — bodies of 
men with ghastly wounds in their hearts, and fragments 
of swords and guns in their stiffening hands, while round 
about them were strewn torn flags and broken spears. A 
battle has been lately fought, I mused as I passed, — this 



WORMWOOD, 



129 



Is what some folks call the " f ^Id of honor, and Might 
has gotten the victory ever Right, as it ever does and as 
it ever will ! And the poppies wave and the birds sing, 
— and the men wh have given their lives for truth and 
loyalty's sake lie here to fester in the earth forgotten, — 
and so the world wags on from day to day and hour to 
hour, and yet people prate of a God of Justice ! . . . 
What next in the moving panorama of vision ? — what 
next ? The sound of a sweet song sung at midnight ! and 
lo ! the moon is there, full, round and warm ! — grand gray 
towers and palaces rise about me on all sides, — and out 
on that yellow-glittering water rests one solitary gondola, 
black as a floating hearse, yet holding light ! She, that 
fair siren in white robes, with boscm bare to the 
amorous moon-rays, — she, with her wicked laughing eyes 
and jewel-wreathed tresses, — is she not beautiful wanton 
enough for at least one hour's joy ! Hark ! — she sings, 
— and the tremulous richness of her silver-toned man- 
doline quivers in accord with her voice across the bright 
dividing wave ! 

" Que 111071 dernier soiiffle., emportS 
Dans less parfums du vent d''etS 
Soit till soupir de volupti ! 
Qu'il vole, papillon charme 
Par Vattrait des roses de mat 
Sur les levres du bien-aime ! " 

I listen in dumb rapt ecstasy, — when all at once the 
moon vanishes, — a loud clap of thunder reverberates 
through earth and heaven, — the lightning glitters aloft, 
and I am alone in darkness and in storm. Alone, — yet 
not alone, — for there, gliding before me in aerial phantom- 
shape, I see Pauline ! — her thin garments wet, — her dark 
locks dank and dripping, — her blue eyes fixed and 
lustreless — but yet, she smiles ! — A strange sad smile ! — 
she waves her hand and passes ; — I strive to follow, but 
some imperative force holds me back, — I can only look 
after her and wonder why those drops of moisture cling 
so heavily to her gown and hair ! She disappears ! — 
good ! — Now I am at peace again, — I can watch to my 
heart's content those little leaping flames that sparkle 
round me in lambent wreaths of exquisitely brilliant 
green, — I can think / . . . 

No sooner did this idea ot thought force itself upon me 



13© 



WORMWOOD. 



than it became an urgent and paramount necessity — and 
I strove to steady that whirUng, buzzing wheel in my 
brain, and compass it to some fixed end, but it was like a 
perpetually shaken kaleidoscope, always forming itself 
into a new pattern before one had time to resolve the 
first. Though this was odd and in a manner confusing, 
it did not distress me at all, — I patiently endeavored to 
set my wits in order with that peculiar pleasure many 
persons find in arranging a scientific puzzle, — and by de- 
grees I arrived at a clear understanding with myself and 
gained a full comprehension of my own intentions. And 
now my intelligent perception became as exact and 
methodical as it had been before erratic and confused, — 
I found I had acquired new force, — new logic, — new views 
of principle, — and I was able to turn over quite quietly 
in my mind Pauline de Charmilles' dishonor. Yes ! — 
dishonor was the word — there was no other — and for 
her sin she had not the shadow of an excuse. And 
Silvion Guidel was a liar and traitor, — he justly merited 
the punishment due to such ca7iaille. What a fool I had 
been to entertain for a moment the idea of forgiveness ! — 
what a piece of wretched effeminacy it would be on my 
part, to actually put up with my own betrayal and aid to 
make my betrayers happy ! Such an act might suit the 
role of a saint, — but it would not suit me, I was no saint, 
— I was a deeply wronged man, — and was I to have no 
redress for my wrong ? 

The more I dwelt upon this sense of deadly injury, the 
more my inward resentment asserted itself and gathered 
strength, and I laughed aloud as I remembered what a 
soft-hearted weakling I had been before,- — befor.^. I had 
learfted the wisdom of abshitJic ! Oh, wonderful elixir !— it 
had given me courage, ferocity, stern resolve, relentless 
justice ! — and the silly plan I had previously devised for 
the benefit of the two miserable triflers who had made so 
light of my love and honor, was now completely altered 
and — reversed ! Glorious absinthe ! What is it the poet 
sings ? — 

" Avec r absinthe y avec le feu 
On peut se diver ti?' uti peu 
Jouer son r$le en quelque dr&me ! " 

True enough ! " Jouer son role en quelque drame ! ** 
Why not ? All things are possible to Absinthe, — it can 



ivo/^mwood: 131 

accomplish more marvellous deeds than its drinkers wot 
uf ! It can quench pity, freeze kindness, kill all gentle 
emotions, and rouse in a man the spirit of a beast of 
prey ! The furious passions of a savage, commingled 
with the ecstasies of a visionary, wake together at its 
touch, and he who drains it deeply and often, becomes a 
brute-poet, a god-centaur, — a thing for angels to wonder 
at, and devils to rejoice in ; — and such an one am 1 ! 
Who is there living that can make me regret a single evil 
deed I have committed, or prove to me at all satisfac- 
torily that my deeds are evil ? No one ! Whosoever has 
Absinthe for his friend and boon companion has made an 
end of conscience, and for this blessing, at least, should 
thank the dreadful unseen gods ! And, while we are 
about it, let us not forget to thank the fine progressive 
science of to-day ! For we have learnt beyond a doubt, — 
have we not ? — that we are merely physical organizations 
of being, — that we have nothing purely spiritual or God- 
born in us, — and thus, this Conscience that is so much 
talked about, is nothing after all but a particular balance 
or condition of the gray pulpy brain-matter. Moreover, 
it is in our own power to alter that balance I — to reverse 
that condition ! — and this once done, shall we not be 
more at peace ? Knowing the times to be evil, why 
should we weary ourselves with striving after imaginary 
good ? The mind that evolves high thought and plans of 
lofty action, is deemed more or less crazed, — it is fevered, 
— exalted, — foolishly imaginative, — so say the wise-acres 
of the world, who with bitter words and chill satire make 
a jest of their best poets and martyrize their noblest men. 
Come, then, O ye great dreamers of the better life ! — 
come, sweet singers of divine things in rhythm ! — come, 
ye passionate musicians who strive to break open the 
gates of heaven with purest sound ! — come, teachers, 
thinkers, and believers all ! — re-set the wrong and silly 
balance of your brains, — reverse the inner dial of your 
lives, as I have done ! — steep your fine feelings in the 
pale-green fire that enflames the soul, — and make of your- 
selves absmtheurs, — the languid yet ferocious brutes of 
Paris, whose ferocity born of poison, yet leaves them 
slaves ! 

The night of wakeful vision past, I arose from my bed, 
—I reeled back as it were out of a devil's shadow-land, 



132 



WORMWOOD. 



and faced God's morning unafraid. It was the day of 
my father's expected return from England, — and 1 sur- 
veyed myself curiously in the mirror to see if there was 
anything noticeably strange or unsettled in my looks. 
jSj'o ! — my own reflection showed me nothing but a rather 
pale countenance, and preternaturally brilliant eyes. I 
dressed with more than usually punctilious care, and 
while I took my early coffee, wrote the following lines to 
Silvion Guidbl : — 

^^ I know all! To your treachery there, can he hut one 
answer. I give you to-day to make yotir preparations^ — to- 
morrow^ at whatever tifne and place I shall choose, of which 
J will inform you through my scco?ids, you will meet me^ — 
unless^ as is possihle^ you are coward as well as liar. 

" Gaston Beauvais." 

I sealed this, and with it in my hand, sallied forth to the 
house of the Cur^, M. Vaudron. The day was chill and 
cloudy, but the rain had entirely ceased, and the lately 
boisterous wind had sunk to a mere cold breeze. I walked 
leisurely ; — my mind was so thoroughly made up as to my 
course of action, that I felt no more excitement about the 
matter. The only thing that amused me now and then, 
and forced a laugh from me as I went, was the remembrance 
of that absurd idea I had indulged in on the previous 
night, — namely, that of actually pardoning the vile injury 
done to me, and exerting myself to make the injuring par- 
ties happy ! That would be playing Christianity with a 
vengeance ! What a ridiculous notion it now seemed ! — 
and yet I had felt so earnestly about it then, that I had 
even shed tears to think of Pauline's wretchedness \ 

Well ! — it was a weakness, — and it was past ! — and I 
arrived at M. Vaudron's abode in a perfectly placid and 
vindictively settled humor. The good Cure owned one of 
those small houses wtih gardens which, in Paris or near it, 
are getting rarer every year, — a cottage-like habitation, with 
a moss-green paling set entirely round it, and two neatly- 
trimmed flower-beds adorning the grass-plat in front. I 
knocked at the door, — and old Margot opened it. Her 
sharp beady black eyes surveyed me with complete 
astonishment at first — she was evidently cross about 
aomethiii^ or other, for her smile was not encouraging. 



WORMWOOD, J33 

" Eh bien^ M. Beauvais ! " she observed, setting her 
arms akimbo. "What can one do for you at this early 
hour in the morning? Not eight o'clock yet, and M. Vau- 
dron is at mass-service — and his breakfast is not yet 
prepared, — and what should he do with visitors before 
noon ? " 

•All this breathlessly, and with much pettish impatience. 

" Tut, Margot ! You must not look upon me as a vis- 
itor," I said quietly. " My errand is soon done. Tiiis " 
— and I held out my sealed-up challenge — " is for M. Sil- 
vion Guidel, voila toutr^ 

. " For M. Guidel ! " she exclaimed, with a toss of her 
head and a quivering of her nostrils, which always be- 
tokened rising temper. " Hein ! best send it after him, 
then ! He is not here any longer — he is gone ! " 

" Gone ! " I echoed stupidly. " Gone ! " 

" Gone ! Yes ! — and why should he not go, if you 
please ? " she inquired testily. " / have had enough of 
him ! He is as difficult to please as an English fnilordy 
— and he has no more heart than a bad onion! I have 
been as kind to him as his own mother could have been, 
— and yet away he went last night without a thank-you for 
my trouble ! He left ten francs on my table — bah ! — 
what is ten francs when one wants a kind word ! And 
M. Vaudron is grieving for the loss of his company like a 
cat for a drowned kitten ! " 

I was so confounded by this unexpected turn of af- 
fairs, that for a moment I knew not what to say. 

" Where has he gone .'' " I asked presently, in a faint 
unsteady voice. 

" Back to Brittany, of course ! " shrilled Margot irritably. 
" W^here else should such a pretty babe be wanted ? 
His father has met with a dangerous accident, — a horse 
kicked him, I believe — anyhow, he is thought to be dying 
— and the precious Silvion was telegraphed for in haste. 
And, as I tell you, he left last night, without a word or a 
look or a ' Dieu vous benisse ' to me/ — me, — who have 
worked fcr him and waited upon him like a slave ! — ah ! 
the wicked ingratitude of the young to the old ! " 

I looked at her in vague surprise, — she was always 
more or less touchy, but there was evidently some- 
thing deeper than mere touchiness in her present humor. 

" Margot, you are cross I " I said, endeavoring to smile. 



134. WORMWOOD, 

" Yes, I am cross ! " and she stamped her foot viciously, 
— then all at once tears welled up in her hard old eyes, — 
" I am cross and sorry both together voila / He was a beau 
gar^on ; — it was pleasant to see him smile, — and he had 
pretty ways, both for his uncle and for me, — that is, when 
he remembered me, which truly was not often. But then 
it was enough, so long as he was in the house, voyez-vous ? 
— and though he would do strange things, such as taking 
those long walks in the Bois by himself, for no earthly 
reason that I could see, — still one could look at him now 
and then, and think of the days when one was young. 
Bah ! " — and she stamped her foot again, and rubbed away 
her tears with her coarse apron — *' I am an old fool, and 
he is, I dare say, a thriftless vaurien^ in spite of all his 
prayers and fasting ! " 

I laughed rather bitterly. 

Par bleu ! Did he pray ? — did >^^fast ? " I inquired, with 
a touch of sarcastic amusement. 

Margot flared round upon me quite indignantly. 

" Did he pray ? — did he fast ? — Why, what else was he 
made for ? " she snapped out. " He was always praying — 
and he ate enough for a bird — no more! He would 
kneel before his crucifix so long that I used to fancy I 
heard the rustle of the Blessed Virgin's robes about the 
house, — for if his petitions would not bring her to take care 
of us all, then I wonder what would 1 And once — ah truly ! 
where would he have been if I had not looked after him ! 
— I found him in a faint in the church itself — he had been 
walking in the Bois as usual, and had come back to 
pray without touching a morsel of food, — but what else 
could you expect ? He was a great big innocent ! — the 
holy saints were the same ! " 

I shrugged my shoulders disdainfully. 

" Do you know, Margot that there are several Ways of 
fighting the devils out of a man ? " I said ; " and starvation 
is one ! Yet even then, it sometimes happens that the 
devils still get the upper hand ! Can you tell me whether 
M. Guidel is coming back to Paris t " 

" No, I cannot ! " she retorted snappishly. " It is 
certain that he is gone, and that I have work to do, — and 
that if you want more news of him, you had better speak 
to M. le Cure. 1 have no time to stand talking here any 
longer I " 



WORAfWOOD. 135 

^^Bien! Bon jour, i\ T argot ! " and I raised my ha!, to 
her playfully. 

'"''Bon jour, M. Gaston ! " she returned tartly ; " and 
try not to be jealous of young men whom God has made 
better-looking than yourself ! " 

And, with a bang, she shut the door upon me. I laughed, 
and sauntered slowly away. Idiotic old woman ! She too, 
withered and wan and uncomely, had also felt the influence 
of Silvion Guidel's accursed beauty, so much so, as to 
be actually fretting over his careless omission to say 
good-bye to her ! And she became rude to me directly she 
saw that I was inclined to depreciate his value ! \Miat 
dolts women were, I thought ! Caught by a charming 
smile, — a pair of fine eyes, and a graceful form, — caught and 
infatuated to folly, and worse than folly, all for a man's 
outward bearing ! — Positively, when one comes to think 
of it, with all our intellectual progress, we are little better 
than the beasts in love ! Physical perfection generally en- 
chains us far more than mental, — as the tiger paces round 
his mate, attracted by her sinuous form, her velvety skin and 
fiery eyes, so we court and ogle the woman whose body 
seems to us the fairest, — so women, in their turn, cast am- 
orous eyes at him whose strength seems the best comparison 
to their weakness. Of course there are exceptions to the 
rule, — but so rarely do they occur that they are chronicled 
among the world's " romances," not realities. And we 
want realities nowadays, do we not ? — no foolish glozing 
over of true and ugly facts ? Well ! — one very true and 
very ugly fact is paramount in human history, namely, 
that this 7nerely physical attraction between man and 
women is of the briefest continuance, and nearly always 
turns to absolute loathing ! We are punished when we 
admire one another's perishable beauty to the exclusion of 
all mental or intelligent considerations, — punished in a 
thousand frightful ways, — ways which have truly a savor 
of Hell I It is, perhaps, unjust that the punishment 
should fall so heavily, — but fall it does, without question 
— unless — unless one is an absintheiir I Then, neither 
crime nor punishment matter one iota to the soul that has 
thus been rendered brutishly impervious to both ! 

I had plenty of food for reflection as I w-alked away 
from the Cure's house, — and to give myself time to think 
quietly, I entered the Bois which was close by, and 



136 IVORMtVOOD. 

roamed up and down there for more than an hour. Silvion 
Guidel had left Paris ; — did Pauline know of this, 1 
wondered ? I tore up the challenge I had written him, 
and flung the little bits of paper far and wide into the 
air, — should I follow him to his home in Brittany ? I 
was not at all inclined for the trouble of the journey. 
Old Margot's allusion to those long walks he used to take 
had opened my eyes to the manner in which he and 
Pauline must have arranged their clandestine inter- 
views ; — the nervous presentiments of Heloise St. Cyr 
had evidently been Only too well founded ! Pauline, under 
pretence of attending mass at M. Vaudron's church, had 
really gone to meet her lover ; — while he, after assisting 
his uncle at the first celebration, had hastened off to keep 
the tryst at whatever part of the Bois they had secretly 
appointed, — and so the amour had been cleverly carried 
on in the early morning hours, without awakening any 
suspicion of wrong in those whose simple belief in 
woman's virtue and man's honor had been thus delib- 
erately outraged. Other meetings elsewhere, too, might 
easily have been arranged, — liars have a thousand 
cunning ways of keeping up their lies ! What dupes we 
had all been ! — what unsuspecting, blind, good-natured, 
trusting fools ! — for I felt certain that even Heloise, 
though she might have had her private fears of Pauline's 
impulsiveness and Guidel's attractiveness, never imag- 
ined her idolized cousin would have fallen so far as she 
had fallen now. I meditated on the whole position for 
a while, and finally returned home, — the result of my 
solitary reverie framing itself into the following letter : — 

*'To Mademoiselle Pauline de Charmilles. 
" Mademoiselle, 

" I hear this morning that M. Silvion Guidel has left 
Paris. Has he made his departure known to you, or 
signified in any way his future intentions ? If not, I 
presume that his return to Brittany will be for good, in 
which case I m3.y possibly I do not s^iy certaiiily) endeavor 
to forget our painful interview of last night. To make 
the best of the terrible position you are in, and also for 
the sake of those to whom your honor is dear, you will 
do well, at any rate for the present, to keep silence — and 
allow the arrangements for our marriage to proceed un- 



WORMIVOOD. ' 137 

interruptedly. As time progresses some new course of 
action may suggest itself to nie, — but, till cither definite 
news is heard from M. Guid^l, or I can see my way to an 
alteration of the contract settled and agreed upon by our 
respective families, you will serve every one concerned 
best, by allowing things to remain as they are. Accept 
my respectful salutations ! 

" Gaston Beauvais." 

I wrote this, — but why ? Did I really intend to 
" endeavor to forget " her crime ? Certainly not ! What 
then did I mean ? — what did I propose to do .'' I ca?inot 
tell you ? I had, or seemed to have, an ulterior motive 
lurking in the background of my thoughts, — but what 
that motive was, I could not explain even to myself ! 
Some force outside of me apparently controlled my 
movements, — I was a passive slave to some unseen but 
imperative master of my wall ! There is such a thing 
as hypnotism, remember ! — the influence of one mind 
acting upon and commanding the other even at a distance. 
But there is something stronger even than hypnotism — and 
that is Absinthe ! The suggestions it offers are resistless 
and implacable — no opposing effort will break its 
bonds ! And it had placed an idea, — a diabolical con- 
ception of revenge somewhere in my brain, — but whatever 
the plan was it did not declare itself in bold form as 
yet, — it was a fiery nebula of disconnected fancies from 
v^'hich I could obtain no settled fact. But I was satis- 
fied that I meant something, — something that would, I 
suppose, evolve itself into action in due time, — and for 
that time I was languidly content to wait. 



138 WORMWOOD. 



XIV. 

About a couple of hours af te r I had written my letter, 
I called at the De Charmilles' house, and delivered it in 
person to Pauline's own maid. I bade this girl tell her 
mistress that I waited for an answer, — and presently the 
answer came, — a little blotted blurred note closely 
sealed. 

" I cannot, will not believe he has gone ! " — it ran — 
" without a word to me ! — it would be too cruel ! What 
shall I do ? — I am desolate and helpless. But / trust 
ycu, Gaston, — and, as you wish it, I will say nothing, 
though to keep silence breaks my heart, — nothing — until 
you give me leave to speak. 

" Pauline." 

This was all, but it satisfied me. I read it, stand- 
ing on the doorstep with the femme-de-chambre watching 
me somewhat curiously. Smiling unconcernedly, I in- 
quired — 

" How is mademoiselle this morning ? " 

" Not very well, monsieur. She has a severe headache 
and has not slept." 

I feigned a proper anxiety. 

" I am exceedingly sorry ! Pray convey to her the 
expression of my deep solicitude ! By the way, have you 
any news of Mademoiselle Heloise ? " 

" Oh oui^ monsieur I She returns to-morrow after- 
noon." 

With this information I retired, — and straightway pro- 
ceeded to the Gare du Nord to meet my father. He 
arrived, punctual to time, and greeted me with the ut- 
most affection. 

" Gloire a la France !^^ he exclaimed, as he alighted on 
the platform and clasped me by both hands. *' What a 



WORMWOOD. 139 

Joy it is to be out of gloomy England I It is the month 
of May as we all know, — and yet 1 have only seen the 
sun three times since I left Paris ! But thou art pale, 
monjils ? Thou hast worked too hard ? " 

"Not at all," I assured him. 

" The little Pauline has been cruel ? " 

I laughed. 

" Cruel ! She is an angel of sweetness, monp^re! — too 
kind, too virtuous and too true for such a worthless 
fellow as I ! " 

My father gave me a quick puzzled glance. 

" You speak with a strange harshness in your voice, 
Gaston," he said anxiously. " Is there anything 
wrong t " 

I tried to be as much like my old self as possible, and 
took his arm affectionately. 

" Nothing, 711071 pere ! — nothing ! All is well. I have 
lost a friend, that is all ; — the admirable Silvion GuidM 
has gone back to Brittany." 

*•'' Tie7is ! what a pity!" and my father looked quite 
concerned about it. " He had become thy favorite com- 
rade too ! When did he go ? " 

" Last night only, and quite suddenly," and I detailed 
the news of the morning as received from Margot. 

My father shook his head vexedly. 

" Ah well ! Then he will have to be a priest after all, 
I suppose ! Quel domiTiage ! Such a brilliant young 
man should have chosen a different career. I had 
hoped Paris would have changed him." 

" You are as fascinated with him as everybody else ! " 
I said, laughing somewhat nervously. My father 
laughed too. 

" Well ! He is a fascinating boy ! " he admitted ; " I 
am already quite sorry for the ladies, old and young, 
who may need to have recourse to his spiritual coun- 
sels ! " 

" By my faith, so am I ! " I rejoined emphatically, in a 
half sotto-voce, which my father, just then busy with his 
luggage, did not hear. 

All that day was one of comparatively empty leisure ; 
but, though I had both chance and opportunity, I did not 
venture to visit Pauline. Old Vaudron came disconso- 
lately in at dinner-time, the forlorn expression of his 



14© WORMWOOD. 

countenance betokening how greatly he missed his 
nephew, though he brightened up a little in my father's 
company. I watched him, — thinking of the secret I held 
. — yet saying nothing. 

"Who would have thought," he dismally complained, 
" that the boy Silvion could have become so dear to 
me ! And to Margot also ! — she is inconsolable ! What 
a warning it is against setting too much store by the 
ties of earthly affection ! It is altogether very unfor- 
tunate ; for now I suppose his parents will hardly bear 
him out of their sight for months ! You see, mon ami," 
— and his kind old eyes moistened as he spoke — " he is 
such a beautiful and gentle soul that one considers hiru 
more an angel than a human being, — he is unlike every- 
body else. Yet, all the same, I think Paris scarcely 
agreed with him. There was an odd restlessness about 
his manner of late, — and a certain bitterness of speech 
that did not well become his nature ; and once indeed 
we had together a very melancholy discussion which, if I 
had not handled it with the nicest care, might have led to 
his indulgence in a deadly sin ! " 

" Impossible ! " I ejaculated with a slight smile. " Sin 
and Silvion Guid^l are leagues apart ! " 

" True, very true ! " responded the gentle, unsuspect- 
ing old man. " And I thank God for it ! Yet, without 
carnal errors, there are spiritual transgressions which 
must be avoided, — and one of these Silvion was inclined 
to fall a prey to, — namely, despair ! Despair of God's 
mercy ! — ah ! this is terrible presumption, and we find it 
so designated in the Holy Roman Missal. He put 
strange and awful questions to me at that time, such as 
this, — * Whether I believed God really cared how we 
lived or what good or evil we committed ! ' Such a fright- 
ful idea ! — a positive tempting of Divine justice ! — it quite 
alarmed me, I assure you ! " 

"And you answered — what ? " I queried, vaguely inter- 
ested. 

" Why, mo?i chcr gar^on^ I answered as my faith and 
duty taught me," he replied with mild austerity. " I told 
him that God certainly did care, — or else He would not 
have placed in the inner consciousness of every human 
being such a distinct comprehension betwixt right and 
wrong." 



IVORMWOOD. 141 

" But — pardon me — it is not always distinct," I in- 
terposed ; " it is frequently very doubtful and uncer- 
tain. If it were more plainly defmed, right action would 
perhaps be easier." 

" Not so, PI 071 petit ^^^ declared Vaudron gently. " Be- 
cause the unfortunate fact is that, though men have 
this distinct feeling of the diflerence between right 
and wrong, they invariably choose the wrong, — the 
reason being that Right is the hardest road, — Wrong the 
easiest." 

*' Then one would argue Wrong to be natural, and 
Right 2<';;natural," I said, " and also that it is useless to 
oppose Nature ! " 

The Curd's eyes opened wide at this remark, and my 
father shook his head at me smilingly. 

*' Do not thou be a sophist, Gaston ! " he said kindly. 
" One can argue any and every way, — but Right is God's 
compass to the end of all worlds ! " 

I made no reply ; — I thought I had begun to know the 
meaning of this " God's compass," — it was nothing but 
the small, delicately poised balance of the brain which 
could, by man's own wish and will, be as easily set wrong 
as right ! 

After dinner I left the two elderly gentlemen over their 
wine and slipped out, for a sudden craving possessed me, 
— a craving, the unwholesome nature of which I perfectly 
understood, though I had neither strength nor desire to 
resist it. The action of absinthe can no more be opposed 
than the action of morphia. Once absorbed into the 
blood, a clamorous and constant irritation is kept up 
throughout the system, — an irritation which can only be 
assuaged and pacified by fresh draughts of the ambrosial 
poison. This was the sort of nervous restlessness that 
shook me now, — and, as it was a fine night, I made my 
way down to the Boulevard Montmartre, where I entered 
one of the best and most brilliant cafes^ and at once 
ordered the elixir that my very soul seemed athirst for ! 
What a sense of tingling expectation quivered in my veins 
as I prepared the greenish-opal mixture, whose magical 
influence pushed wide ajar the gates of dreamland ! — with 
what a lingering ecstasy I sipped to the uttermost dregs 
two full glasses of it, — enough, let me tell you, to un- 
steady a far more slow and stolid brain than mine ! The 



142 WORMWOOD. 

sensations which followed were both physically and 
mentally keener than on the previous evening, — and when 
I at last left the cafe and walked home at about midnight, 
my way was encompassed with the strangest enchant- 
ments. For example : there was no moon, and clouds 
were still hanging in the skies heavily enough to obscure 
all the stars, — yet, as I sauntered leisurely up the Champs 
Elysees, a bright green planet suddenly swung into dusky 
space, and showered its lustre full upon my path. Its 
dazzling beams completely surrounded me, and made the 
wet leaves of the trees overhead shine like jewels ; and I 
tranquilly watched the burning halo spreading about me 
in the fashion of a wide watery rim, knowing all the time 
that it was but an image of my fancy. Elixir Vitae ! — the 
secret so ardently sought for by philosophers and alchem- 
ists ! — I had found it, even I ! — I was as a god in the 
power I had obtained to create and enjoy the creations of 
my own fertile brain, — for, truly, this is all that even high 
Omnipotence can do, — namely, to command worlds to be 
borne by the action of His thought, — and again to bid 
them die by an effort of His will ! The huge creative 
force of all time and all space can be no more than an end- 
less and boundlessly immense Imagination. And one 
spark of this Imagination is perhaps the only divine thing 
we have in our mortal composition, — though, of course, 
like Reason, it can easily be perverted to false and crim- 
inal ends. But we of Paris care nothing as to whether 
our thoughts run in wholesome or morbid channels so 
long as self-indulgence is satiated. My thoughts, for in- 
stance, were poisoned, — but I was satisfied with their 
poisonous tendency ! And I was in no wise disconcerted 
or dismayed when, on reaching home and ascending the 
steps, I found the door draped with solemn black, as if 
for a funeral, and saw written across it in pale yet lustrous 
emerald scintillations — 

" La Mort habite ici ! " 

Quietly I put out my hand and made as though I would 
touch these seemingly substantial sable hangings, — they 
rolled away like rolling smoke, — the dismal inscription 
vanished, and all was clear again ! Entering, I found my 
father sitting up for me. 



WORMIVOOD. 143 

" Thou art late, Gaston ! " he said, as I came towards 
him, yet smiling good-naturedly as he spoke. " Thou 
hast been at the De Charmilles' ? " 

" Not to-night," I answered carelessly. " I have only 
walked to the Boulevards and back." 

" Vraimc7it! A new sort of amusement for thee, is it 
not ? Thou art not likely to become a boulevardier ? " 
And he clapped me kindly on the shoulder as we ascended 
the stairs together to our respective bedrooms. " But, no ! 
Thou hast worked too well and conscientiously to have 
such a suggestion made to thee even in jest. I am well 
pleased with thee, man Jils^ — I know how difficult thy 
duties have been during my absence, and how admirably 
thou hast fulfilled them." 

I received his praise passively without remark, and he 
continued — 

" For the next week take holiday, Gaston, and for the 
week after that again ! Then comes thy marriage, — and 
I will strive to do without thee for a full two months. 
Where wilt thou spend thy lune-de-tniel V^ 

" Where } In Paradise, of course ! " I answered, with 
a forced smile. 

My father laughed, — brushed his bearded lips against 
my cheek, an old French custom of his whenever he felt 
particularly affectionate, and we parted for the night. 
What a sound sleep that good man would have, I thought, 
as I watched him turn into his room, and saluted him re- 
spectfully in response to his last cheerful nod and glance. 
He would not see what / saw when I entered my own 
chamber! Pauline was there, asleep! — she lay on my 
couch, her head resting on my pillows, — her lips parted 
in a sweet drowsy smile, — while over her whole fair form 
fell a shimmering veil of green, like mist hanging above 
the lakes and mountains in a halcyon midsummer noon ! 
Ah, gentle soul ! — image of child-like innocence and love ! 
— there she was, reflected on the mirror of my brain as 
purely and faithfully as she had been cherished in my 
thoughts for many and many a day ! I stood, silently 
looking on for a space at the beautiful phantom of my 
lost idol, — looking as gravely, as sadly and as regretfully 
as I would have looked at the dead. Then, extending my 
hands slowly as a wizard might do, I attempted to touch 
that delicate recumbent figure, — and lo ! — it melted into 



144 WORMWOOD. 

naught — my bed was once more smooth, bare, and empty, 
— empty of even the spectre of delight ! I threw myself 
down upon it, fatigued in body and mind, yet not unpleas- 
antly so ; — closing my aching eyes, I wandered away into 
a cloudy realm of confused phantasmal pageant and 
fantastic vision, and, dreaming, fancied that I slept ! 



iVOKAnVOOD. 145 



XV. 

That same week, Hdloise St. Cyr returned from Nor- 
mandy, and, two days after her arrival in Paris, my 
father and I were invited to dine with the De Char- 
milles, our good friend the Cure being also of the party. 
I was vaguely amused at the whole affair, — it went off 
so well, and there were two such admirable actors af 
table, namely, myself and Pauline. Trust a woman to 
eclipse every one in the art of feigning ! She, Pauline, 
was a mere brilliant scintillation of dazzling mirth and 
eoqtietterie from the beginning of the dinner to its end. 
It was only pretence, I knew, but who would have 
thought she could have pretended so well! Now and 
then I was smitten with a sudden amaze at her, — but ob- 
serving her narrowly I noticed the feverish flush on her 
cheeks, the almost delirous brilliancy of her eyes, the un- 
natural scarlet of her lips, — and I realized that however 
unconcerned she might appear in outward bearing, she 
was inwardly enduring agonies of mental torture such as 
few could imagine. This conviction filled me with a cer- 
tain morbid satisfaction, though I often found my atten- 
tion wandering from ber to her cousin Heloise, whose 
stay in Normandy certainly seemed to have freshened 
and intensified her beauty. For she was beautiful, — I 
who had formerly been loth to admit this acknowledged 
it at last. There was more color in her face, — and she 
possessed a tranquil, almost imperial stateliness of man- 
ner that was singularly attractive. My gaze dwelt upon 
her with a sort of fascination, — and occasionally I caught 
her pure serious eyes regarding me with an anxious wist- 
fulness and wonder. The Comte and Comtesse de Char- 
milles were evidently delighted to have their fair niece 
once more under their roof, — and as for Pauline, — why, 
she very cleverly affected to be glad ! — she could do no 
less and no more ! Of course the conversation turned 
19 



146 " WORMWOOD. 

frequently upon Silvion Guidel and his sudden depart- 
ure ; and M. Vaudron told us he had received a tele- 
gram announcing his nephew's safe arrival at his home in 
Brittany, but no further news than this. 

" He will never come back to Paris again, I am sure ! " 
said Pauline, laughing quite hilariously. " He has gone 
for good 1 " 

*' I am afraid he has, my child," returned the old 
Cure regretfully. " But perhaps it is better so. Paris is 
not the place for men of serious purpose, — and he has 
seen it — he knows what it is like, — that is quite enough 
for him." 

Pauline gave not the faintest sign of interest in these 
remarks, — she had been daintily dividing a large bunch of 
grapes with the grape-scissors, and she now held out a 
cluster of the fruit to me, smiling. As I accepted it, I 
looked her full and steadily in the eyes, — but she did not 
blush or tremble. What mummers we both were, I 
thought ! — and what a part we had chosen to play ! Why 
did we not blurt out the truth of the position like honest 
folk and take the consequences .'* Why ? — Well, why 
does not every sinner make a clean breast of his secret 
evil thoughts and misdeeds, and, blazoning them to the 
world, abide calmly by the result .•* It would be noble — 
it would be stern-principled, — but afterwards ? When we 
had all frankly admitted ourselves to be more or less 
liars and knaves not worth a hand-shake or a thank-you, 
what then 1 Nothing but this, — society would be at an 
end, and we might as will pull down our cities and re- 
turn in howling nudity to the forests of primeval bar- 
barism. Besides, we in France always like to feign a 
little virtue, however much we may feel prone to vice,— 
we are fond of alluding melodramatically to " 7idtre 
mere^^ and le tombcau de notre pere^^ — in fact, we gener- 
ally manage to draw in our dead ancestors to support us 
in our feverish hours of strong mental excitement or 
high-pressure morality. And as regarded Pauline and her 
wretched secret, she was in my hands, — /had the ruling 
of the game, — 1 and my " green-eyed fairy " whose magi- 
cal advice I now followed unhesitatin2;ly, and I did not 
choose to speak,— J'/?/. I waited, and tlie miserable child 
Pauline also waited on — my v/ill. 

There are some few uncomfortable people in the world, 



WOA'MIVOOD. 147 

however, who cannot be altojjjether deceived, and H^loise 
St. Cyr was one of these. She always took things very 
tranquilly and with a sort of even Socratic philosophy, — 
but she would probe to the bottom of them somehow. 
And she was very difficult to deal with, as 1 found, when, 
after dinner, I entered the drawing-room as usual with 
the other gentlemen. It was a warm and beautiful even- 
ing, — the windows stood wide open, — the garden was gay 
with flowers, and across the small lawn in front strolled 
Pauline, carolling softly to herself the refrain of a song. 
He'loise, in one of those straight simple white gowns she 
was so fond of wearing, stood within the window-embra- 
sure looking out, but turned quickly round as soon as she 
"was aware of my entrance. 

" M. Gaston," she said hurriedly, in a half whisper, 
" tell me ! — what is wrong with Pauline .-* " 

I met her eyes with a studied expression of complete 
amazement. 

" Wrong with Pauline "i " I echoed. " Why nothing ! 
Hear how she sings ! — like a lark in full sunshine ! — See 
how merry she is ! — how well she looks ! " 

" Her merriment \s forced,''^ declared Heloi'se emphati- 
cally. " And she is 7iof well. Oh, cannot you, who love 
her, see that she is unhappy ? She is changed — quite 
changed, even to me, — she turns everything I say to a 
jest even when jesting is entirely out of place, — she is 
restless — irritable, — she will hardly remain quiet for an 
hour. She used to be so fond of me, — and now ! — why 
she did not seem to be at all glad to see me come back, 
and she avoids my eyes so strangely ! Oh, M. Gaston ! 
— did you think of the warning I gave you before I left ? 
— or did it slip your memory ? Did I not ask you to see 
that the child was not left too much alone ? " 

W^hat a strange hardness there was at my heart ! — her 
anxious words, her eager looks excited no more emotion 
in me than this — that with each moment I grew increas- 
ingly conscious of her exceeding physical grace and 
beauty. 

** I always remember everything you say, Heloise," I 
answered, steadfastly regarding her with, as I know, a 
look of open admiration, and watching with a half smile, 
the rich blood mounting to her cheeks, while an amazed 
eml:arrassment gathered in her eyes. " But I never quite 



1 48 WORMWOOD, 

comprehended why you should so greatly concern your- 
self about the matter. Pauline can surely be trusted ! 
Do you not think so ? " 

" I do think so ! " she responded swiftly — brave girl ! 
— true friend ! — " but it is hardly fair to expect the dis- 
cretion of age and experience from one who is almost a 
child, — and such a beautiful child too ! Pauline is all 
impulse, — she is sensitive, — wayward sometimes — she 
takes sudden fancies and sudden dislikes, — and, as I told 
you once before, she hardly understands herself " 

Here she broke off and caught her breath, while her 
large eyes dwelt on me in a vague fear. "Why do you 
look at me so strangely, M. Gaston } " she faltered nerv- 
ously. " What is it .? " 

I laughed coldly. " What is it ? Why — nothing, ma 
cJiere Heloise ! — what should there be ? It is you who 
seem to have vague ideas of something which you do not 
express — and it is I who should ask, * What is it .-* ' " 

She still breathed quickly, and suddenly laid her hand 
on my arm. 

" You too are changed ! " she said. " Tell me truly ! — 
do you still love Pauline?" 

" Can you doubt it ? " and I smiled. " I love her, — 
madly ! " 

And I spoke the truth. The passion I felt for the 
little frail thing whom I could see from where I stood, 
flitting about the garden among the flowers, was indeed 
mad^ — no sane mind would have ever indulged in such a 
tumult of mingled desire and hatred, as burned in mine. 

" I am going to her," I added more tranquilly, seeing 
that Heloise seemed alarmed as well as uneasy. " I shall 
ask her for one of those roses she is gathering, as ^ gage 
d'amour.''^ I moved away, — then paused a moment. 
" Your trip to Normandy has done you good, Reloi'se. 
You are looking adorable ! " 

What a lightning-glance she gave me ! — it swept over 
me like the death-flash of a storm ! I stopped, rooted to 
the ground, as it were, by the sudden spiritual dazzlement 
of her beauty, — why did my heart-throbs send such clam- 
orous vibrations through my frame? — what force was 
there in the air that held us twain, man and woman, spell- 
bound for a moment, gazing at each other wildly as 
though on the brink of some strange destiny ? In that 



IVOKMIVOOD. 



149 



one l)ricf space of time all life seemed waiting in suspense, 
— and had I yielded to the fiery impulse that possessed 
me then, I should have clasped that fair angelic woman 
in my arms and called her love, salvation, hope, rescue ! 
— 1 should have told her all, — given her my very soul to 
keep, and so I might have missed perdition 1 But it was 
a mere passing madness, — I could not account for it then, 
and can hardly account for it now, — but whatever shock 
it was that thus by magnetic impulse shook our nerves, 
it moved us both with strong and singular agitation, for 
Heloise fled from my sight as though pursued by some 
avenging spirit, — and I, after a couple of minutes' pause, 
recovered my composure, and stepping out into the garden 
there joined Pauline. She looked up at me as I ap- 
proached — her face wore an expression of extreme weari- 
ness. 

" How long is this to last, Gaston ? " she murmured. 
" How long must I play this terrible part of seeming to 
be what I am not ? I am so tired of it ! — Oh God ! — so 
tired ! " 

I walked silently by her side round among the shadows 
of some tall trees to a spot where we were out of the ob- 
servation of any one who might be looking from the 
house-windows. 

" Have you heard from your lover ? " I then asked 
coldly. 

Her head drooped. " No ! " 

" Do you think it likely that you will hear ? " 

She sighed. " I believe in him," she said. " If my 
belief is vain — then God help me ! " 

I studied her fair and delicate features scrutinizingly. 
She was lovely, — lovelier in her grief than in her joy, I 
thought — a broken angel in a ruined shrine. But her 
beauty left me cold as ice, — impervious as adamant, — 
Absinthe had numbed the tenderer fancies of my brain, 
and in obedience to its promptings I answered her. 

" That is what all criminals say, when confronted with 
the disastrous consequences of crime — ' God help me ! ' 
But God's assistance is not always to be relied upon, — it 
frequently fails as in cases of the direst necessity. The 
beggar says, ' God help me ! ' yet continues to beg on, — 
the suffering cry, ' God help us,' and still they starve 
and weep, — the dying man in his agony exclaims, ' God 



i^O VV0RMIV003. 

help me ! ^ and his torments are not softened a whit. — and 
you, poor little thing, are like the rest of us, trusting to a 
divine rescue that is frequently too late in coming, if in- 
deed it ever comes at all." 

She gave a languid gesture of hopelessness. 

*' Then God is cruel," she said wearily. " And yet — 
He made these." 

And she held out the roses she had lately plucked and 
made a posy of, — but as she did so, the fairest bud sud- 
denly crumbled and fell in a shower of pale pink leaves 
upon the ground. 

" Yes ! — He made them, — made them to perish ! — ^for 
which strange and unaccountable end He has seemingly 
made all things, even you and me," I responded, taking 
her cold passive hand in mine. " As the rose-leaves fall, 
so beauty dies, — so hope passes, — so fidelity proves 
naught ! Silvion Guidel has deserted you, Pauline ! " 

She shivered, but made no reply. 

" What will you do .-* " I went on mercilessly. " What 
way is there left for you to escape dishonor ? How will 
you avert shame from those parents whose pride is centred 
in you ? Think ! As yet they know nothing, — but when 
they do know, what then ? " 

Her blue eyes fixed themselves unseeingly upon the 
roses in her hands, — her lips moved, and she murmured 
faintly — 

" I can die ! " 

I was silent. 

She could die, — this little fair thing for whom life had 
scarcely begun, — certainly, she could die ! We all have 
that universal remedy. And there was no power on 
earth that could prevent her, if she chose, from deliber- 
ately shutting out the world forever from her sight, and 
finding peace in death's acceptable darkness. Yes — she 
could die — even she ! 

" Pauline, Pauline ! what a fate ! " I said at last. 
" How terrible to realize it ! — to think that you — you for 
whom nothing seemed too good, too happy, or too bright, 
should be at this pass of dire misfortune, — and all through 
the black base treachery of a liar, a traitor, a dishonor- 
able cowardly villain " 

" Stop ! " she exclaimed in a low fierce voice that 
Startled la-j. " You shall not blame him in mj^ hearing I 



IVORMIVOOD. tPt 

I have told you I can die, — 1)ut I shall die loving him, — 
adoring him, — to the end ! " 

Oh the love of a desperately loving woman ! Can any- 
thing under the sun equal its strength, its tamelessness, 
its marvellous tenacity ! This fragile girl — wronged, de- 
serted, ruined, — still clung to the memory of her betrayer 
with such constancy that she, not having yet seen full 
nineteen years of existence, could calmly contemplate 
death for his sake ! Ah God ! — why could she not have 
loved 7ne thus tenderly ! I looked at her, and she met 
my gaze with an almost queenly challenge of mingled 
sorrow and pride. 

" You are brave, Pauline," I said quietly, " brave to 
recklessness, — brave to the extremest limits of unreason- 
ing despair ! But pray compose yourself and listen to me. 
I am more cautious — perhaps more practical in the fore- 
seeing of events than you can be. Of course it is well- 
nigh impossible to calculate the social result of our un- 
happy position towards each other should we decide 
to make the whole affair public, — but, in the meanwhile, 
I want you to understand that your secret is safe in 
my hands, — the honor of the De Charmilles is not 
yet given over to the dogs of scandal ! " I paused, 
and a tremor ran through her frame, — she knew, as I 
knew, that her sin was one that her father, proud of his 
lineage and ancestral glories, would never forgive and 
never forget. " You gave me credit once for generosity," 
I continued, " and the most generous thing I could do 
would be to still take you as my wife, and shield your name 
from blemish under cover of mine. For your parents' 
sake this would be best and kindest, — but for me, not so 
well ! I doubt much whether I could ever reconcile my- 
self to such a course of action. It is therefore sincerely 
to be hoped that M. Silvion Guidel will find it consistent 
with his ho7ior " — and I laid a sarcastic emphasis on this 
word — " to write and inform you of his intentions before 
the day appointed for your marriage with me comes much 
closer at hand. As you must be aware, there is only a 
space of about ten days between then and now." 

She looked up at me in anguished entreaty. 

" And must I still keep silence ? " she asked. 

" Really, mademoiselle, that is entirely as you please 1" 
I returned composedly. " I shall not speak — as yet j— « 



152 ' WORMWOOD. 

but \iyou choose to make full confession to your parents 
or to your cousin, that is a different matter. No doubt 
such frankness on your part would greatly simplify the 
whole disastrous affair, — but this must be left to your own 
discretion ! " 

And I smiled slightly. I knew she was of far loo 
shrinking and nervous a temperament to brave her father's 
fierce wrath, her mother's despair, and the wondering 
horror and reproach of all her friends and relatives, so 
long as there remained the least chance of escape 
from such a terrible expose. If Silvion wrote to her, — 
if Silvion sent for her, — she would of course fly to 
join him and leave everything to be discovered when 
she had gone, — but if, on the contrary, he kept silence 
and made no sign, why, there was nothing to be done 
but to wait — to wait, as I before said, on my will ! I 
offered her my arm to escort her back to the house, — 
she accepted it mechanically, and together w^e returned to 
the drawing-room. Heloise was there, reading aloud from 
a newspaper an account of the triumphs of a celebrated 
violinist whose name had recently become a sort of musical 
watchword to the ardent and aspiring, — and her eyes 
sparkled with animation, as, looking up from the journal, 
she told us she had been invited to meet this same 
brilliant "star " at a neighbor's house the next evening. 
Her aunt smiled at her enthusiasm, — and the Comte de 
Charmilles remarked — 

" Thou shouldst ask him to try thy violin, Hdloise ; — it 
is not every demoiselle who possesses a real undoubted 
Stradivarius." 

" Is it a Strad ? " I asked, with some interest, fixing 
my eyes on Hdloise, who for once avoided my direct gaze 
as she replied — 

" Yes. It is an heirloom, and has been in my mother's 
family for more than a hundred years, but no one among 
us ever played it till I suddenly took a fancy to try my 
skill upon it. There is rather a sad legend attached to it 
too." 

"Ah, now we sha-U have you at your best, Mademoiselle 
Heloise ! " said my father, smrling. " You will, of course, 
tell us this legend .? " 

" If you wish." And H(51oise, moving to the further 
end of the room, opened her violin-case and took out the 



JVOKAflVOOD, 153 

instrument. " But you must look at it carefully first. 
Through the F holes you will see the sign-manual of 
Stradivarius, and also something else. There are several 
other words, — can you make them out?" 

We gathered round her, and each in turn examined the 
interior of the violin, and finally managed to decipher the 
following — 

"yir mcurs parceqite faime F amour flus que ma vie — 
Parle, violon, quand je suis tnort, de ma reine Maru.^* 

Beneath these lines was a monogram of two letters 
entwined in a wreath of laurel, and as we handed back 
the instrument to its fair owner, our eyes inquired the 
meaning of the motto. 

" This Strad belonged, so the story goes," said Heloise 
softly, " to one who in his time was considered the 
greatest violinist in the world. His name no one knows, 
— his monogram is there, but cannot, as you see, be 
distinctly deciphered. The legend, however is, that he 
loved a great lady of the Court of France, and that she 
showed him many favors for a little while, till suddenly, 
out of some cruel and unaccountable caprice, she deserted 
him, and would never receive him or even look upon his 
face again. Maddened by despair he slew himself, — and 
these lines inscribed inside the violin are written in his 
own blood. It is supposed that he took the instrument 
apart to write the device within it, as, according to one 
account, it is said to have been found seemingly broken 
by the side of his dead body. If this be true, then skilled 
hands must have put it together again, for here it is, as 
you see, intact, and with a strange pathos in its tone, or 
so I fancy, — a pathos that it would be difficult to ecual. 
Listen ! " 

And she drew the bow across the G string slowly, while 
we involuntarily held our breath. It was such a weird, 
wild, full, and solemn sound, — something like the long 
grave organ-note drawn forth by the wind from the close- 
knit branches of old trees. " Parle, violon, quand je 
suis mort ! " Such had been the last prayer of its long- 
ago dead master, — and truly its eloquence had not ceased 
to be convincing. The " reine Marie " had been careless 
of love and capricious, as beautiful women so often are, 
but still the passionate tones of her lover's instrument 



t54 IVORMIVOOD. 

bore faithful witness to her beauty's conquering charm ! 
We were all in expectation that Heloise would play some- 
thing ; but in this we were doomed to disappointment, 
for she quietly put the violin back in its case and locked 
it, in spite of her aunt's affectionate entreaty that she 
would favor us with one little mor^eaii. 

" I am not in the humor, aunt," she said simply — and 
there was a weary look in her eyes — " and I should not 
play well. Besides " — and she smiled a little — " you must 
remember that there is a grand maestro just now in Paris 
— and the very consciousness of his presence in this city 
seems actually to paralyze my efforts ! " 

A vague irritation stirred me that she should attach so 
much importance to the arrival of a mere professional 
" star " in the art of violin-playing. 

" Do you know the man ? " I asked abruptly. 

" Not personally," she replied. " As I told you, I am 
to meet him to-morrow evening. But I have heard him 
play — that is enough ! " 

I shrugged my shoulders. 

" You are enthusiastic, Heloise ! " I remarked satirically. 
" I thought you were a veritable Pallas Athene — always 
calm, always cold ! " 

She looked at me with a strange deepening brilliancy 
in her eyes. 

" Cold ! " she faltered, " I " 

I was near her as she spoke and our glances met. 
Once more that curious magnetic thrill ran through 
me, — once more that inexplicable shock seemed to agi- 
tate us both. But it passed as it had passed before, 
— and just then M. Vaudron came up to us with some 
ordinary remark that scattered our thoughts into all 
sorts of different and commonplace directions. The 
evening ended, to all appearances, as satisfactorily as it 
had begun, — our elders evidently had no shadow of sus- 
picion that anything was wrong, — and when 1 parted from 
Pauline, it was with a carefully studied assumption of that 
lover-like reluctance to say farewell which once had been 
too real to need feigning. Heloise, as she murmured 
"good-night! " gave me her hand, — I held it a moment 
in my own, — then kissed it with grave courtesy. What 
could have possessed me then, I wonder, that I should 
have felt such a keen sense of delight as I saw the color 



WOKMWOOD. 



^55 



rush over her fair pale cheeks like a sudden glow of sunset 
on alabaster 1 I suppose it must have been the conscious 
ness of the growing devil within me, — the devil that had 
already begun to preach away conscience and make a 
gibe of principle, and that in a short time was destined to 
become so strong that whatever there was of true man- 
hood in me would be utterly exterminated by its insidious 
power. The devil born of Absinthe ! — the fair, brave 
fiend, whose fidelity to the soul it seizes upon, like that of 
its twin-sister Morphia, never releases till death ! Every 
hour of every day its hold on my brain grew closer, firmer, 
and more absolute, till I ceased to feel even so much as 
a passing throb of compunction, and with my eyes open 
to the abyss of darkness before me, voluntarily drifted 
slowly yet steadily down I 



156 H^OHM^OOD. 



XVI. 

Time went on, and yet no sign from Silvion GuidH. 
One letter only, from his mother to the Curd, thanking 
him for all the care and kindness he had shown to " notre 
cher et bien-aime Saint Silvion," and stating that this 
same "saint" was in excellent health and progressing 
admirably with his religious studies, was all the news we 
received. Now and then I thought I would go to Brittany, 
and seek him out and fight him to the death there, — but, 
after a little cogitation, I always dismissed the idea. It 
was better, I decided, to wait on. For Pauline had written 
to him twice, — and I naturally imagined that his answer 
to the desperate appeals of the girl he had betrayed would 
be a swift and unexpected return to Paris, — unless, indeed, 
he should prove himself to be altogether a man beneath 
even a beggar's contempt. Meantime all the arrange- 
ments for my marriage with Pauline went smoothly on, 
without any interference from either of the principal par- 
ties concerned. It was settled that the civic registration 
should take place first, in the grand drawing-room of the 
Comte de Charmilles, before a large and brilliant assem- 
blage of friends and guests, — the religious ceremony was to 
follow afterwards in the pretty little church of which M. 
A^audron was the presiding genius. The invitations had all 
been sent out, — one going to Silvion Guidel in due course, 
— and I, languidly amused thereat, wondered how he would 
take it ! As for me, I was now quite resolved on my own 
plan of action. My drugged brain had evolved it in the 
wanderings of many dreamful nights, — and though the 
plot was devilish, to me, in my condition, it seemed just. 
Why should not the wicked be punished for their wicked- 
ness ? Holy Writ supports the theory, — for did not 
David, " a man after God's own heart," pray that his 
enemies might be consumed as with fire, and utterly de- 
stroyed ? Dear, good, gentle, Christian friends ! — you who 
love your Bibles and read them with diligent attention, I 
beg you will study the inspired pages thereof again and 
yet again, before you dare to utterly abhor me, who am 



WORMWOOD. 157 

your fellow-mortal ! Consider the pious joy with which 
you yourselves look forward to seeing those particular 
persons whom you specially abhor, roasting in Hell for 
all eternity, while you, sweet, clean souls, walk placidly the 
golden pavement of serenest Heaven ! It is possible, 
nay more than probable, that you will be disappointed in 
these sublime anticipations, — still, you can nurse the 
generous hope while here below, only do not turn round 
and condemn me, because I also, in the spirit of David, 
desired to see my enemies " confounded and put to 
shame " in this life ! Had I no patience, you may piously 
ask, to wait till after death ? No ! Because " after 
death " is a shadowy circumstance ; one cannot be cer- 
tain what will happen, and the present wise age does well 
to seize its opportunities for good or for evil while it can, 
here and 7iow / 

In the short interval that had yet to elapse before the 
day of my intended nuptials, a curious change worked 
itself in me, — a change of which I was palpably, physi- 
cally conscious. I can only explain it by saying that my 
brain seemed dead. A stony weight lay behind my tem- 
ples, cold and hard and heavy. I shall perhaps make 
myself understood better if I analyze my sensations thus : 
— namely, that when my brain was in its former normal 
condition before the absint/ie-furia had penetrated to its 
every cell, it was like a group of sensitive fibres or cords 
which, when touched by memory, sentiment, affection, or 
any feeling whatsoever, would instantly respond in quick 
pulsations of eager and easy comprehension. Now, it 
seemed as if all those fibres had snapped in some strange 
way, leaving in their ]place a steel reflector of images, — a 
hard bright substance on which emotion simply flashed 
and passed without producing any actual responsive 
vibration. Yet certain plans of action seemed to be part 
of this steel pressure, — plans which, though they ap- 
peared in a manner precise, still lacked entire consecu- 
tiveness, — and not the least remarkable phase of my 
transformation was this, — that good, or what moralists 
call good, presented itself to me as not only distinctly un- 
natural, but wholly absurd. In brief, the best and clear- 
est expression I can give to my condition of mind for the 
benefit of those medical experts who have perhaps not 
thoroughly comprehended the swift and marvellous in- 



158 WORMWOOD. 

fluence of the green nectar of Paris on the human nerves' 
and blood is, that my former ideas and habits of life were 
completely and absolutely reversed. We are told that the 
composition of the brain is a certain gray matter in which 
countless shifting molecules work the wheels of thought 
and sensation ; — in the healthy subject they work har- 
moniously and in order, — but — and this is to be remem- 
bered — a touch will set them wrong, — a severe blow on 
the outside case or skull may, and often does, upset their 
delicate balance ; — what think you then of a creeping fire, 
which, by insidious degrees, quickens them into hot con- 
fused masses, and almost changes their very nature ? 
Aye ! — this is so ! — and neither gods nor angels can pre- 
vent it. Give me the fairest youth that ever gladdened a 
mother's heart, — let him be hero, saint, poet, whatever 
you will, — let me make of him an absmtheur I and from 
hero he shall change to coward, from saint to libertine, 
from poet to brute. You doubt me ? Come then to 
Paris, — study our present absinthe-drinking generation, — 
absintheurs^ and children of absintheurs^ — and then, — 
why then give glory to the English Darwin ! For he was 
a wise man in his time, though in his ability to look back, 
he perhaps lost the power to foresee. He traced, or 
thought he could trace, man's ascent from the monkey, — 
but he could not calculate man's descent to the monkey 
again. He did not study the Parisians closely enough 
for that ! If he had, he would most assuredly have 
added a volume of prophecies for the future to his famous 
pedigree of the past. 

Curious and significant too, among my other sensa- 
tions, was the dull aversion I had taken to the always 
fair, though now sorrowful, face of Pauline. The girl in 
her secret wretchedness annoyed me, — there were 
moments when I hated her, — and again, there were times 
when I loved her. Loved her ? — yes ! — but not in a way 
that good women would care to be loved. Moreover, 
Hdloise St. Cyr had come to possess an almost weird 
fascination for me. Yet I saw very little of her, — for a 
new interest had suddenly entered her life, — the great 
violinist whom she had been so eager to meet, had heard 
her play, and had been so enchanted, either with her or 
the valuable Stradivarius she owned, that he had volun- 
teered, for art's sake, to give her a lesson every day 



IVORMIVOOD. 159 

during the brief time he remained in Paris. After some 
lillle hesitation, and an anxious consultation with her 
aunt as to the propriety of this arrangement, the offer 
was accepted, — and she was straiglitway drawn mto an 
artistic and musical circle which was considerably 
divided from ours. I never had a chance of either see- 
ing or hearing the brilliant v\o\\n-7?ia(-'slro whose triumphs 
were in every one's mouth, — I only knew that he was not 
old, — that some people considered him handsome, and 
that he was entirely devoted to his art, — but no more 
personal news than this could I obtain concerning him. 
Heloise too was singularly reticent on the subject, only 
her wonderful gray-green eyes used to shine with a 
strange fire whenever he was mentioned, and this vaguely 
vexed me. However I was not given much opportunity 
to brood on the matter, — as the famous " star " very soon 
took his departure, and beyond the fact that Heloise 
played more divinely than ever, I almost forgot, in the 
rush of more pressing events, that he had crossed the 
even tenor of her existence. 

Three days before my intended marriage — only three 
days ! — I received, to my utter amazement, a letter from 
Silvion Guidel. It began abruptly, thus — 

" I understand that you know everything, — therefore 
you will realize that no explanation can make me more 
of a villain than I acknowledge myself to be. / cannot 
marry. I was ordained a priest of Holy Church yester- 
day. Circumstances have moulded my fate in opposition 
to my will, — and I can only throw myself upon your 
mercy and ask you not to visit my crime on the head of 
the poor child I have wronged. I cannot write to her — I 
dare not ; I am weak-natured and afraid of woman's 
grief. The only way left to me for the atonement of the 
evil I have done is through a life of hard penitence and 
prayer. This I have chosen, entreating you all to pardon 
me and to think of me as one dead. 

Silvion Guidel." 

A fierce oath broke from me as I crushed this epistle 
in my hand. Specious villain ! — canting hypocrite ! 
Ordained a priest ! — sheltered in the pale of the Church 
*— vowed to perpetual celibacy, — and what was worse 



l6o WORMWOOD/ 

Still, exempt from the call of a duel ! If I could have 
seen him at that moment before me I would have sprung 
at him like a wild beast, thrown him on the ground, and 
trampled upon his fair false face till not a vestige of its 
beauty was left ! For some minutes I gave way to this 
impotent mad fury, — then, gradually recollecting myself, 
smoothed out the crumpled letter and read it through 
again. The coils of fate round the unfortunate Pauline 
had grown more and more entangled, for now, supposing 
the whole truth were told, she would be in a worse pre- 
dicament than ever, — since, unless her lover chose to leave 
the priesthood as rapid. y as he had entered it, marriage 
was imipossible. True enough, her only rescue lay with 
me ! — true, that if I chose to accept Silvion Guidel's cast- 
off light-o'-love as my wife, no one need be any the wiser 
save only myself and the unhappy girl whose miserable 
secret was in my hands. But I resented the position 
which appeared thus forced upon me, and in this I think 
was no worse than any other man might have been under 
similar circumstances. Combined however with my 
natural resentment, there was another and more cruel 
teeling, — an insatiate longing to make Pauline understand 
thoroughly the heinous enormity of her sin. For at pres- 
ent, she seem.ed to me to have merely the stagey senti- 
ment of the French melodramatic heroine, who, after dis- 
gracing herself, dishonoring her parents, and dealing 
wholesale misery all round, scruples not to boast of her 
*' amoicr " as a wonderful virtue recommendable to the 
special intercession of Heaven. It was in this particular 
phase of her character that she had grown hateful to me, 
— while her physical beauty remained what it always had 
been in my eyes, — exquisitely captivating to the senses 
and resistlessly adorable. Yet with all my busy brooding 
on the one subject, I cannot say I ever came to any de- 
finitely settled plan. What I did do in the long run was 
the wild suggestion of a moment, worked out by one hot 
flash from the burning glance of the " green fairy " in 
whose intoxicating embrace I had drowsed my soul away 
for many nights and days. I considered deeply as to 
whether I should show the letter I had received from 
Silvion Guiddl to Pauline or not 1 Better wait, I thought, 
and see how the tide of events turned, — there was yet 
time, — let her cling to her false hope a little longer — that 



pvoA'j^nvooD. i6i 

frail sheet-anchor would all too soon be torn from her 
feeble hold ! 

And so the dull minutes rounded into hours, — hours 
that passed in the usual uneven way, some slow, some 
rapidly, according to the mood in which they were sever- 
ally met and disposed of, and the eve of my marriage 
came. All seemed well. I played my part, — Pauline 
played hers. I called at the De Charmilles', and found 
everything in the bustle of active preparation, — the 
dining-room was being decorated with flowers, — large 
garlands and bouquets occupied almost every available 
space in the entrance-hall, and on my inquiring for my 
fiancee, I was shown by the smiling excited maid-servant 
into the morning-room where, after a few minutes, Pauline 
entered. She looked very pale, but very calm, — and came 
straight up to me with a strange wistfulness in her deep 
blue eyes. 

" You have not heard from Silvion 1 " she said at once, 
in a low but earnestly inquiring tone. 

" I ! " and I shrugged my shoulders as though in 
amazement at the absurdity of such a question. 

" No, — I suppose he would not write to j^7<j," she mur- 
mured sadly. " Then, he must be ill, or dead." 

Strange tenacity of woman's faith ! She could not, 
would not, believe he had deserted her. She resumed, 
with a curious air of grave formality — 

" It seems you really intend to marry me. Monsieur 
Beauvais .-* " 

" It seems so, truly, mademoiselle ! " I returned frigidly. 

She looked at me steadfastly. 

" Listen ! " she said. " I know why you do it, — for 
my father's sake — and for the sake of good M. Vau- 
dron, — to save honor and prevent scandal, — you do it for 
this, — and I — I do not know whether to thank you or 
curse you for your pity ! " She paused, trembling with 
the excess of her emotion, then continued — " But — un- 
derstand me, Gaston — I will never live with you ! I will 
never owe to you so much as a crust of bread ! I will go 
on with this ceremony of marriage, as you seem, for the 
sake of others, to think it best — but afterwards — after- 
wards I will go away to die somewhere by myself, where 
I shall trouble no one, and where not even dear good 
Heloise will be able to find me. Disgraced, I will bear 



1 62 WORMWOOD. 

the solitude of disgrace, — ruined, I will abide by my 
ruin ! " 

I studied her features with a cold scrutiny that made 
her cheeks flush and her limbs tremble, though her eyes 
remained quietly fixed on mine. 

" You have made your plans, I see," I said. " But 
I — I also have plans ! You say you will go away to 
* die ' — not so ! — you mean you will go in search of your 
lover ! Has it ever struck you that he may not want 
you } Men are like children — when their women-toys 
are broken, they care for them no longer. So far things 
have gone on smoothly in our two families, and by ret- 
ience we have fought off scandal, — but I must ask you 
to remember that if I once bestow my name upon you, 
you will owe me obedience, — ifl make you my wife, the 
past must be blotted out forever, and I shall expect from 
you a wife's duty." 

I smiled as I spoke, for I saw her shrink and shiver 
away from me as though an icy wind had touched her 
with its breath. 

" How can the past be blotted out forever," she 

faltered," when " Here she paused suddenly and drew 

herself erect. " Gaston Beauvais, when 1 came to you 
and told you all that night, I placed my fate in your 
hands. I asked you to break your engagement with 
me — and you made excuse and delay — you would not. 
Nor would you let me speak. You told me you would act 
for the best, and I trusted everything to you, — I thought 
you would spare me, — I believed that you would be 
generous and pitiful. But you have changed, — you have 
changed so greatly that I scarcely know you — except 
that I am sure you do not wish me well. There is some- 
thing cruel in your eyes — something fatal in your smile ! 
Tell me truly — why do you marry me ? " 

She regarded me with a touch of fear as she put the 
question. 

"Pardon, mademoiselle ; but you anticipate ! " I re- 
plied calmly. " I have not married you — yet ! " 

" To-morrow " she began. 

Springing to her side 1 grasped her suddenly by the 
arm. I felt a strange fire pricking in my veins, — one of 
those accesses of heat and fury which were growing fre- 
quent with me of late. 



IVORMIVOOD. 163 

" Tomorrow has not come ! " I said in low fierce ac- 
cents. " Wait till it does ! What do you take me for, 
silly child ? Do you think you can play with a man's 
heart as you have played with mine, and meet with ?io 
punishment ? Do you think you can wreck a whole Ufe 
and not be scourged for such wanton cruelty ? I have, it 
is true, screened your name from obloquy up till now, — 
with yourself alone and me rests the horrible secret of 
your shame. But wait — wait ! — you are not married to 
me yet — and if you have enough courage for the task, you 
can still escape me ! Proclaim your own infamy to your 
parents — to your pure and saintly cousin Heloise to- 
night, — break their hearts — shake down their high faith in 
you to the dust of dishonor, — but before doing so, mark 
you ! — it would be as well to ask M. Vaudron for the 
latest news of his admirable nephew ! " 

Her eyes dilated with terror, and she repeated the 
words after me, like a dull child learning some difficult 
lesson. 

" Ask M. Vaudron for the latest news of his nephew !" 
— and her very lips turned white as she spoke — "the 
latest news of Silvion ! Y021 know it then .^ " — and she 
turned upon me with a gesture of imperial authority 
— " tell me what it is ! How dare you withhold it .'' Tell 
me instantly ! — for, if he is ill, I must go to him, — if he is 
dead, I must die ! " 

I laughed savagely. 

*' He is dead to you, mademoiselle ! " I said. " But 
otherwise, he is alive and well, and at this very moment 
he is probably at his holy prayers ! He has entered the 
priesthood ! — and by that simple act, has escaped both 
my sword and your embraces ! " 

She gave a smothered cry — staggered and seemed 
about to fall, — I caught her on my arm, and she leaned 
against me struggling for breath. 

" Silvion, — Silvion a priest ! " she gasped. " Oh no ! 
— not after all his promises ! — it is not — it cannot be true ! " 

" Ask the Cure," I said. " He no doubt has the news 
by this time. He is a good man, — not used, like his 
nephew, to the telling of lies." 

She put away my supporting arm gently, yet decidedly, 
and pressing one hand against her heart, looked me full 
in the eyes. 



l64 WORMWOOD. 

" How do you know this ? " she asked. " Why should 
you, of all people in the world, be the first to tell it to 
me ? " 

I read her suspicions, — and returned her glance with 
one of the utmost scorn. 

" You distrust my word ? " I queried ironically. 
" Well, perhaps you will accept your lover's own voucher 
for the information. Here it is, — pray read it for yourself 
and be satisfied." 

And drawing from my pocket the letter I had received, 
I unfolded it and spread it open on the table before her. 
With a sharp exclamation, she snatched it up and quickly 
perused its every word, — then — oh strange nature of 
woman ! — she covered it with passionate kisses and tears. 

" Good-bye, Silvion ! " she sobbed softly. " Good- 
bye, my love ! — my dearest one ! — good-bye ! " 

Turning to me, she said, while the drops still rained 
through her lashes — 

" May I keep this letter ? " 

I shrugged my shoulders disdainfully, — her melodra- 
matic sentimentality filled me with abhorrence. 

" Certainly, if you choose ! " 

" It is my death-warrant," she went on quietly, trying 
to steady her quivering lips, " and it is signed by the 
dearest hand in the world to me ! Oh, I shall die quite 
bravely now ! — there will be nothing to regret, even as 
there is nothing to hope. But, Gaston, yon are very cruel 
to me ! — you are not like your old kind self at all. I am 
so poor and slight and miserable a thing — I cannot under- 
stand how it can be worth your while to judge me so 
harshly. Never mind — it does not matter — I shall not 
trouble you long. I have been very wicked, — yes — I 
know that, — and you, Gaston, you wish me to be pun- 
ished ? Well then, does it not please you to know that my 
heart is broken ? My heart — my heart ! — Silvion ! " 

And, covering her face with her hands, she suddenly 
turned and fled from the room. I heard the door close 
behind her, — and I thought myself alone. Every nerve 
in my body pulsated with the suppressed excitement of 
my mind, and, leaning one hand against my hot brows, I 
pressed my fingers over my eyes to try and shut out the 
pale green light that now and then flashed before them, 
^hen a touch on my shoulder startled me. I looked up, 



WOkMWOOD. 165 

— Hdloise St. Cyr stood beside me, pale and grave as a 
sculptured nun, and I stared at her in vague amazement. 

*'What is the matter, M. Gaston ? " she inquired. 

I forced a laugh. 

" Matter, He'loise ? Truly, — nothing ! " 

*' Nothing ! " she echoed incredulously. *' Why, then, 
was Pauline in tears ? She passed me just now without a 
word, — but I heard her sobbing." 

I met her questioning gaze unconcernedly. 

" A lover's qnarrel, chere Pallas Athene ! " I said lightly. 
" Have you never heard of such things.'* " 

A frown darkened the fairness of her classic brows. 

*' A quarrel on the eve of marriage ? " she queried coldly. 
" It seems unnatural and unlikely. You are deceiving me, 
M. Gaston." 

I smiled. 

*' Possibly ! " I answered " But what would you ? I 
fancy we were born into the world, all of us, for the sin- 
gular purpose of deceiving each other ! " 

Her eyes filled with a vague fear and surprise. 

" What do you mean ? " she faltered nervously. 

" Do not ask me, Heloise ! " And, advancing a step 
or two, I caught her shrinking hand, and held it prisoned 
in my fevered clasp. " I cannot tell you what I mean ! I 
do not know myself. There are certain phases of feeling 
and passion — are there not.-* — which storm the soul at 
times, — we are shaken, but we cannot explain the shock 
even to our innermost consciences ! Do not speak to me 
— do not look at me ! — Your eyes would draw out the 
secret of a madman's misery ! Ask your own heart if there 
are not strange and complex emotions within it, as in mine, 
which have never been uttered, and never will be uttered ! 
If we could only speak frankly, we men and women, at 
certain moments when the better part of us is paramount, 
— my God ! — if we could only dare to be ourselves, who 
knows ! the w^orld might be happier ! " 

With this incoherent outburst, the drift of which I my- 
self scarcely understood, I hurriedly kissed the hand I 
held, released it, and left her. How she looked, I know 
not, — something clamorous and wild in my blood warned 
me agamst another chance meeting of her eyes with mine. 
I should have cauo^ht her to mv breast and fri2:htened her 
With ^ne passion of my embrace, — and yet — did 1 love her ? 



i66 WOJ^MWOOD. 

I cannot tell, — I think not. It was only the indefinable 
attraction of her personality that overpowered my senses, 
— when I was once iiway from her and outside in the open 
air, my emotion passed, just as a faintness that has been 
brought on by the powerful perfume of tropical lilies will 
pass in the reviving breath of a cool wind. I walked 
rapidly homeward, thinking as I went of the morrow, and 
wondering what it would bring forth. Either Pauline de 
Charmilles would be mine, or she would not. It all 
seemed to rest on the mere turn of a hair. For in my 
condition of brain nothing in the whole world appeared 
decided, because the eventuality of death was always pres- 
ent. I calmly considered and balanced the probability 
that Pauline, now knowing the pusillanimous part her lover 
had chosen to play, might kill herself. It is the common 
way out of a love-difficulty with many Frenchwomen. Or 
— I might die ! That would be droll ! and unexpected too, 
— for I felt life's blood beating very strong in me, and I 
had now something to live for. I considered with a good 
deal of self-congratulation, the admirable cunning with 
which I had managed to keep the secret of my growing 
absinthe-mania from my father and every one connected 
with me. True, some stray remarks had been made once 
or twice on a change in my looks, but this was chiefly set 
down to overwork. And my father had occasionally remon- 
strated with me against a quick, querulous impatience of 
temper which I frequently displayed, and which was new 
to my disposition, — but with his usual good-nature, he 
had found plenty of excuses for me in the contemplation 
of all the business I had sucessfully got through during 
his absence in England. The alteration in me was really 
almost imperceptible to unsuspecting outsiders ; only I 
myself knew how complete and permanent it was. 

That night, — the night before my wedding-day, I drank 
deeply and long of my favorite nectar, — glass after glass I 
prepared, and drained each one off with insatiable and 
ever-increasing appetite, — I drank till the solid walls of 
my own room, when at last I found myself there, appeared 
to me like transparent glass shot through with emerald 
flame. Surrounded on all sides by phantoms, — beautiful, 
hideous, angelic, devilish, — I reeled to my couch in a sort 
of waking swoon, conscious of strange sounds everywhere, 
like the clanging of brazen bells and the silver fanfar- 



WORMIVOOD. 167 

ronade of the trumpets of war, — conscious too of a 
singular double sensation, — namely, as though Myself 
were divided into two persons, who opposed each other in 
a deadly combat, in which neither could possibly obtain 
even the merest shadow-victory! It was a night of both 
horror and ecstasy, — the beginning of many more such 
nights, — and though I was hurried to and fro like a leaf 
on a storm-wind, among crowding ghosts, open tombs, 
smiling seraphs, and leering demons, I was perfectly con- 
tent with the spectral march of my own brain-pageantry. 
And I quite forgot — as I always wish to forget — that there 
are fools in the world for whom heart-freezing absinthe 
has no charms, and who therefore still prate like children 
and idiots, of God and Conscience 1 



x68 WORMIVOOD-. 



My marriage-moming ! — it broke out of the east with 
the sweetest forget-me-not radiance of blue over all the 
tranquil sky. I rose early — I was aware of a ^■iole^t 
throbbing in my temples, — and now and then I was seized 
with a remarkable sensation, as though some great force 
were, so to speak, being hurled through me, compelling 
me to do strange deeds without clearly recognizing their 
nature. I took a long walk before breakfast, but though 
the air and motion did me some amount of good, I never- 
theless found myself totally unable to resist certain im- 
pulses that came over me, — as, for instance to laugh aloud 
when I thought of that white half-naked witch who had 
been my chief companion in the flying phantasmagoria of 
the past wild night. How sv/iftly she had led me into the 
forgotten abodes of the dead, and how her mere look and 
sign had sutnced to lift the covers of old coinns and ex- 
pose to view the mouldering skeletons within ! — the eye- 
less skulls that, for all their lack of vision, had vet seemed 
to stare upon us while we mocked their helpless deso- 
lation ! Oh, she was a blithe brave phantom that 
Absinthe-witch of mine ! — and one thing she had done 
had pleased me right well. We had flown through the 
dark, she and I, on green outspread wings, and, flnding 
on our way a church-door standing open we had entered 
in. There we had seen silver lamps steadily burning, — 
there we had heard the organ pealing forth strange 
psalmody, and there we had discovered a priest kneeling 
on the altar-steps with wondrous Raffaelle-like face up- 
turned to the shining Host above him. *' Silvion Gui- 
del ! " we had shrieked loudly in his ears, my elfin 
comrade and I — ''' Die, Silvion Guidel I " And " Die, 
Silvion Guidel ! " was echoed back to us in a thunder of 
many voices, — while, as the chorus smote the air, lo ! the 
Host vanished from sight, — the altar crumbled into dust, 
there was no more sign of salvation, hope, or rescue for 
that criminal there who dared to kneel and pray, — there 
was nothing — nothing but the yawning blackness of an 



WORMWOOD. 169 

Open grave ! How my fair witch laughed as she pointed 
to that dull deep hole in the ground ! — how 1 kissed her 
on the ripe red lips for the appropriateness of her death- 
ful suggestion ! — how I toyed with her fiery-gold hair ! — 
and how we fled off again, more swiftly than the wind, 
through scenes wilder yet not so haunting to the memory ! 
My glorious Absinthe-fairy ! — she was nearly always with 
me now, — in different shapes, arrayed in different hues, 
but always recognizable as a part of me. Her whispers 
buzzed continually in my brain and I never failed to list- 
en ; — and on this particular morning — the morning of 
my intended marriage, — she was as close to me as my 
very blood : — she clung to me, and I made no effort as I 
had no desire to shake her off. 

Ten o'clock was the hour fixed for the civic ceremony, 
in order that ample time might be given to allow the 
religious one to take place before noon. Just as we were 
about to start for the scene of the nuptials, my father, who 
had been watching me attentively, suddenly said — 

" Gaston, art thou well ? " 

I looked full at him and laughed. 

" Perfectly well, mon Fere ! Why ask such a ques- 
tion ? " 

" Your eyes look feverish," he answered, " and I have 
noticed that your hand shakes. If you were not my son, 
I should say you had been drinking ! " 

I bit my lips vexedly, — then forced a smile. 

^^ Merci / But cannot you allow for a little unusual ex- 
citement on one's wedding-day ? " 

His countenance cleared, and he laid one hand affec- 
tionately on my shoulder. 

" Of course ! Still — to be quite honest with you, Gas- 
ton, I must say I have lately,observed an alteration in your 
looks and manner that does not bode well for your health. 
However, no doubt a change of air will do you good. A 
month in Switzerland is a cure for almost any ailing man." 

Switzerland ! I laughed again. It had been settled for 
us by our friends that we were to pass our honeymoon, my 
bride and I, by the shores of the blue romantic lakes that 
Byron loved and sang of. I had never seen the splendor 
of the snow-mountains, — I have never yet seen them, and 
it is very certain now that I never shall ! 

I avoided any further converse with my father, and was 



170 ' W0R3IW00D. 

glad that so little time was left us for the chance of a tete- 
d-tete. Punctual to the hour appointed, we drove to the De 
Charmilles' residence and found the outside of the house 
lined and blocked with carriages ; — the guests were arriving 
in shoals. We entered the grand drawing-room ; it was 
exquisitely adorned with palms and flowers, and for one 
dazed moment I saw nothing but a whirl of bright faces 
magnificent bouquets tied with floating ends of white and 
and colored ribbon. People seized my hand and shook it 
warmly ; — I heard myself congratulated, and managed to 
enunciate a few formal replies. Presently I came face to 
face v/ith the bridesmaids, — all clad in palest pink, — all 
ready for the church ceremony, which to them, as women, 
was of course the most interesting part of the performance, 
— and in the centre of this group stood Heloise St. Cyr, 
looking strangely pale and grave. Whether it was the pink 
color of her robe, or the brilliant tint of the superb roses 
she carried, I could not then decide, but certain it was that 
I had never seen her so wan and wistful-eyed, and as I 
gravely saluted her, I wondered whether she knew any- 
thing, — whether Pauline, in a sudden fit of desperate 
courage had told her all ? An odd fierce merriment began 
to take hold of me, — I smiled as I pressed her extended 
gloved hand. 

" You are looking lovely as usual, Heloise," I said, in a 
low tone, — for, indeed, her fair and spiritual beauty exer- 
cised over me a spell of mingled fear and fascination, — 
" but are you not somewhat fatigued ? " 

Her eyes rested steadily on mine. 

" No," she replied calmly ; " I am only a little anxious 
about Pauline. To me, she seems very ill." 

I feigned the deepest concern. " Indeed ! I trust " 

She swept out of the group of bridesmaids and beckoned 
me to follow her apart. I did so. 

" Something terrible has happened, — I am sure of it ! '* 
she said with passionate emphasis. " You spoke so 
strangely yesterday, and she has wept all night. Oh, why 
— why will you not tell me what it is '^. The child is afraid 
of you ! " 

" Pauline afraid of »/<?/" I exclaimed, raising my eye- 
brows in simulated amazement. " Really, Heloise, I can- 
not understand " 

She made a movement of impatience and laid her bou- 



IVORAflVOOD. 171 

quet of flowers Hf]:htly against her lips. " Hush ! we can- 
not speak now, — it is too late ! But — if you meditate any 
wrong or cruelty to Pauline — well ! — God may forgive you, 
but /will not!" 

Her e3'es flashed a positive menace, — she looked em- 
press-like in that moment of wrath, and my admiring 
glance must have told her as much, for the color 
crimsoned her cheeks to a deeper hue than that of the 
red roses in her hand. But that she resented my look 
was evident, — for she turned from me with a gesture of 
dislike and disdain, and as I noted her proud step and 
mien, a sudden ferocity possessed me. A curse, I thought 
on all such haughty, beautiful women who dare to wound 
with a glance, and slay with a smile ! Let them learn to 
suffer as they make men suffer ! — nothing less will bring 
down their wantonness or impress upon their arrogant 
natures the value of humility ! I walked with a firm step 
up to the table where the civic authorities were already 
seated with their books and pens, and gayly shook hands 
with all I personally knew. M. Vaudron was of course 
not present, — his part of the business was to be trans- 
acted at the church, where no doubt he was even now 
waiting. The Comtesse de Charmilles stood near me, — - 
there were tears in her eyes, and she, like her niece 
Heloise, looked pale and anxious, while in her smile as 
she saluted me affectionately, there was something almost 
appealing. The Count himself had left the room ; nat- 
Hrally, all present knew his errand. There was a hush ot 
expectation, — the bright eyes of the lovely and fashion- 
able women assembled were turned eagerly towards the 
door, — it opened, and Pauline entered, in full bridal 
attire, leaning on her father's arm. White as a snowflake 
— impassive as marble, — she seemed to be walking in her 
sleep, her eyes fixed on vacancy, — she looked neither to 
the right nor to the left, — she returned none of the gay 
greetings of her friends who recoiled from her in evident 
amazement at her strange demeanor ; — once or twice 
only a thin shadowy smile parted her lips, and she bowed 
mechanically as though the action were the result of a 
carefully-learned lesson. On she came, — and I heard 
whispered observations on her deadly paleness ; but I was 
too busy with my own rising frenzy to heed aught else. 
I was enraged ! — what business had she, this fair, frail, 



ij2 



WORMWOOD. 



helpless-looking girl, to come to me as though she were a 
white fawn being led up to have its tender throat slit ! — 
how dare she pose before me like a statue of grief with 
that look of quenchless unutterable despair frozen on her 
face ! — aye ! — how dare she, knowing herself so vile, thus 
mutely invite compassion ! One of those irresistible 
sudden rushes of demoniacal impulse stronger than my- 
self seized me ; — I felt the blood surging in my ears 
and burning at my finger-tips, — I was in the grasp of a 
force more potent than fire to destroy, — and without act- 
ually realizing quite what I meant to do or to say, I waited ; 
waited till the stately Comte de Charmilles, — proud par- 
ent! — reached me where I stood, — waited, till he, by a 
gracefully courteous gesture, appeared to dumbly present 
me with my bride! Then the clamorous devil in me 
broke loose and had its way, — then^ yielding to its subtle 
suggestions, I tasted my revenge ! — then, I had the satis- 
faction of seeing the haughty old aristocrat blench and 
tremble like a leaf in the wind as he met my coldly scorn- 
ful gaze and the mockery of my smile! Drawing myself 
stiffly erect just as he came within an arm's length of me, 
I made a distinct and decided movement of rejection, — 
then raising my voice so that it might be heard by all 
present, I said slowly and with studied politeness — 

" M. le Comle de Charmilles, I am sincerely sorry to 
give you pain ! — but truth is truth, and must sometimes 
be told, no matter how disagreeable ! In the presence 
therefore of these our relatives, friends, and guests, permit 
me to return your daughter to your paternal care ! — I, 
Gaston Beauvais, refuse to marry her ! " 

For one moment there was horrified stillness, — the 
old Count turned a ghastly white and seemed paralyzed 
— Pauline moved not at all. Then my father's clear voice 
rang through the hushed room sharply. 

"Gaston, art thou mad ! " 

I looked at him calmly. 

^'- All cofiiraire, I am quite sane, I assure you, monp^re) 
I repeat, — I utterly decline the honor of Mademoiselle 
Pauline de Charmilles' hand in marriage. That is all ! " 

Another dead silence Not a person in the room stirred 
and all eyes were fixed upon me. Every one seemed 
stricken with alarm and nmazemerst, save Pauline her- 
self who, like a veiled image, might have beea carved in 



WORMWOOD. 173 

stone for any sign of life she gave. Suddenly one of the 
civic authorities turned round from the table on which the 
books of registration lay prepared. He was an old man 
of punctilious and severe manner, and he regarded me 
sternly as he said — 

" Upon what grounds does Monsieur Gaston Beauvais 
propose to break his plighted word to Mademoiselle De 
Charmilles ? lie should state his reasons as publicly as 
he has chosen to state his withdrawal ! " 

I looked at the Count. His face was flushed and he 
breathed heavily, I saw him nervously press his passive 
dau<yhter's arm closer to his side. 

"Yes! on what grounds.?" he demanded thickly and 
hurriedly. " Truly it is a question that needs answering ! 
— on what grounds ? " 

I felt rather than saw the instinctive movement of the 
whole brillant assemblage of guests towards me, — every 
one was bending forward to listen, — I caught a glimpse 
of the pale horrified face of Heloise St. Cyr, and just then 
Pauline raised her sorrowful blue eyes and fixed them 
upon me with a world of silent reproach in their grief- 
darkened depths. But what cared I for her looks ? I 
was mad, and I revelled in my madness ! What mattered 
anything to me save the clutch of the fiend at my throat 
— the devil that compelled me to fling away every thought 
of gentleness, every merciful and chivalrous impulse to 
the winds of hell ! 

" On w'hat grounds ? " I echoed bitterly. " Simply — 
dishonor ! — shame 1 Is this not enough .? Must I speak 
still more plainly? Then take all the truth at once ! — I 
cannot accept as my wife the cast-off mistress of Silvion 
Guidel J " 



174 WORMWOOD. 



XVIII. 

The blow had fallen at last, and with crushing effect. 

" Oh vile accusation ! " cried the Count, shaking his 
daughter from his arm. " Pauline ! — Speak ! Is this 
true ? " 

Unsupported she stood, and feebly raised her hands, 
clasping them together as though in prayer ; a strange 
wild smile crossed her pale lips, — such a smile as is 
sometimes seen on the faces of the dying ; but in her 
eyes, — beautiful passionate dark-blue eyes ! — the fatal 
confession of her misery was written. No one looking 
upon her then could have doubted her guilt for an in- 
stant. In a single upward despairing glance she admitted 
everything — her lips moved, but not a sound issued from 
them, — then, all silently, as snow slips in a feathery 
weight from the bending branch of a tree, she fell prone 
like a broken flower. A tremulous murmur of compassion 
rippled through the room, — but nevertheless, every one 
hung back from that insensible form, — aye, every one ! — 
for the Comtesse de Charmilles had swooned in her chair, 
and it was more comme ilfaut to minister to her, the 
blameless wife and respectable matron, than to the 
wretched child whose disgrace had been thus publicly 
proclaimed ! Every one hung back did I say t No, — not 
every one ; for while I stood gazing at the scene, savagely 
satisfied at the havoc I had wrought, Heloise St. Cyr 
sprung forward like an enraged pythoness, her whole form 
quivering with wrath and sorrow, and flinging herself on 
her knees beside her unconscious cousin, she lifted her 
partially from the ground, and held her to her breast with 
passionate tenderness. 

'■'■Ldcher^ she cried, flashing her indignant eyes full 
upon me, while the scornful word from her lips whipt me 
as with a scourge. " Coward ! Cruel, vile coward ! 
Shame upon you ! — shame ! Oh, what a fine boast of 
honor you can make now, to think you have cast down 
this poor little life in the dust and blighted it forever ! A 
woman's life tool— a life that is powerless to do more^ 



WORMWOOD. 



175 



than suffer the wrongs inflicted upon it by the wanton 
wickedness of men ! Pauline ! Pauline ! Look at me, 
darling ! Look at Hdloise, who loves thee, — who will 
never forsake thee — pauvrc, pauvre petite ! Leave her to 
me 1 " she exclaimed almost fiercely as one of the younger 
bridesmaids, trembling and fearful, timidly came forward 
to volunteer her assistance. " Leave her — desert her, as 
every one will, now she is broken-hearted ; it is the way 
of the world ! Why do yo7i wait here, Gaston Beauvais ? " 
— and her contemptuous glance fell so witheringly upon 
me, that for the moment I was awed, and the hot frenzy 
of my brain seemed to grow suddenly stilled — " you have 
done your premeditated work — go ! You have had ven- 
geance for your wrong — enjoy it ! Had you been a true 
man you might have wreaked your wrath on the chief 
actor in this tragedy, — the murderer, not the victim ! " She 
paused, white and breathless ; then, seeming to summon 
all her forces together, she continued passionately, " May 
your wickedness recoil on your own head ! — may the ruin 
you have brought on others come down with tenfold vio- 
lence upon yourself ! — oh ! may God punish you ! — He 
must — He will — if Heaven holds any justice ! " She 
paused again, panting excitedly, and one of the lady 
guests here touched her on the shoulder. 
"Heloise ! Heloise ! Be calm — be calm ! " 
" Calm ! " she echoed with a wild gesture. " How can 
I be calm when Pauline may ^c dead ! Dead ! — and he 
— he has killed her ! Oh, Pauline, Pauline ! my little 
darling ! — my pretty one ! — Pauline ! " And, breaking into 
sobs and tears, she kissed the cousin's cold hands and 
death-like face again and again. 

Now to me^ all this disorder and excitement presented 
itself merely as a curious scene, — quite stagey in fact, 
like a " set " from a romantic opera, — I could have laughed 
aloud, after the fashion of the murderess Gabrielle Bom- 
pard, when she was shown the graphic police-illustrations 
of her own crime, — and even as it was, I smiled. I 
noticed several people looking at me in amazed disgust, 
— but what did I care for that ! The merest soup^oji of 
truth always disgusts society ! Meanwhile, the assem- 
blage had broken up in entire confusion, — every one was 
departing silently and almost as if by stealth. The civic 
authorities had taken solemn and sympathizing leave of 



176 WORMWOOD. 

the Comte de Charmilles, who sat rigidly erect in an arm- 
chair, making no response whatever to anything that was 
said to him, — some one had been despatched with a 
message to the Cure, M. Vaudron, to inform him that the 
ceremony was broken off, — the Comtesse had been as- 
sisted to her apartment, — servants were now lifting the 
insensible figure of Pauline from the ground, — and amid 
it all, I stood quietly looking on, vaguely amused at the 
whole performance. It entertained me in a sort of dim 
fashion to observe that I was now generally avoided by 
those who had previously been eager to claim acquaint- 
ance with me, — the departing guests made me no saluta- 
tion, and I appeared to be held in sudden and singular 
abhorrence. What a droll world, I thought ! Always 
prating about morality, — and yet when a man makes a 
bold stand for morality and publicly declares he will not 
marry a woman who is the victim of an esclandre, he is 
looked upon as a heartless wretch and cruel barbarian I 
Such a thing should be done quite quietly and privately, 
whispers society. Indeed ! Why t How are the in- 
terests of " morality " to be served by hushing such 
matters up among the exalted few ? I was still musing on 
this, and on human inconsistency generally, when my 
father touched me on the arm. 

" Come away from this house of affliction," he said 
sternly. " Come away ! Your presence here now is 
nothing but an insult ! " 

How fierce the fine old man looked, to be sure ! It 
occurred to me as being rather odd that he should 
seem so indignant ; but I followed him mechanically. 
We were just about to leave the house, when a serv- 
ant ran after us with a card which she put into my 
hands, departmg instantly again without a word. A 
challenge, I thought derisively ? — who was there in all 
that fashionable crowd of men that would care to draw a 
sword in Pauline's honor! No one, truly; for the card 
simply bore the name of the Comte de Charmilles, with 
the following words written across it in pencil : " I re- 
quest that Monsieur Gaston Beauvais will call upon me 
to-morrow before noon." I thrust it in my pocket, and 
walked after my father who had preceded me, and who 
was now waiting impatiently for me outside the great 
^orte-cochhre of the Count's residence, keeping his head 



WORAflVOOD x'j'j 

carefully turned away from the gaze of the various 
owners of the departing carriages, in order that he might 
not be compelled to recognize them or talk with them 
of what had just taken place. When I joined him, he 
marched on stiffly and in perfect silence till we were well 
out of sight of everybody — then he turned round upon me 
and gave vent to a short sharp oath, — his eyes glittering 
and his lips trembling. 

" Gaston, you have behaved like a villain ! I would 
not have believed that ;;/_>' son could have been capable of 
such a coward's vengeance ! " 

I looked at him, and shrugged my shoulders. 

"You are excited, vioii plre ! What have I done, save 
speak the truth, and, as the brave English say, shame the 
devil ? " 

" The truth — the truth ! " said my father passionately. 
" Is it the truth .? and if it is, could it not have been told 
in a less brutal fashion t You have acted like a fiend ! — 
not like a man ! If Silvion Guidel be a vile seducer, and 
that poor child Pauline his credulous, ruined victim, could 
you not have dealt with him and have spared her ? God ! 
I would as soon wring the neck of a bird that trusted me, 
as add any extra weight to the sorrows of an already 
broken-hearted woman ! " 

Gallant old preux-chevalier ! He meant what he said, 
I knew, — and 1 — I had been wont to share his sentiments, 
not so very long ago ! But I said nothing in response to 
his outburst ; I merely hummed the fragment of a tune 
under my breath, my doing so causing him to stare at me 
in indignant surprise. 

" I suppose it is true ? " he broke forth again. " It is 
not a mahcious trumped-up lie .-* " 

" As I heard of it first from the lips of the lady con- 
cerned in it, I have no reason to doubt its accuracy ! " I 
murmured coldly. 

" Then you have known of it for some time ? " 

I bent my head assentingly. 

" Then why not have spoken ? " he cried wrathfully. 
" Why not have told me ? Why not have done everything, 
— anythi?ig, rather than proclaim the fact of the poor mis- 
erable little girl's disgrace to all the world .<* Why, above 
all, did yuu not challenge Guidel ? '' 

" I was prepared to do so when he suddenly left fo^ 



178 WORMWOOD 

Brittany," I rejoined tranquilly; "and once there, he 
knew how to give my justice the slip ; he has entered the 
priesthood ! " 

" By Heaven, so he has ! " And my father struck his 
walking-stick heavily on the ground. " Miserable pol- 
troon ! — sanctimonious young hypocrite ! " 

" I am glad," I interrupted, smiling slightly, " that you 
at last send the current of your wrath in the right direc- 
tion ! It is rather unjust of you to blame me in the 
affair " 

*' Farbleii! you are as much a villain as he ! " exclaimed 
my father fiercely. " Both cowards ! — both selfishly bent 
on the ruin of a pretty frail child too weak to resist your 
cruelty ! Fine sport, truly ! Bah ! I do not know which 
is the worst scelerat of the two ! " 

I stopped in my walk and faced him. 

" Are we to quarrel, sir ? " I demanded composedly. 

" Yes ! — we are to quarrel ! " he retorted hotly. " There 
is something in my blood that rises at you ! — that sickens 
at you, though you are my son ! I do not excuse Guidel, 
— I do not excuse Pauline, — I do no say you could have 
married one who by her own confession was dishonored; 
— but I do say and swear that in spite of all, you could 
have comported yourself like an honest lad, and not like 
a devil incarnate. Who set you up as a judge of justice 
or morality t What man is there in the world with such 
clean hands that he dare presume to condemn the mean- 
est creature living ! I tell you plainly that, after your 
conduct of to-day, the same house cannot hold you and 
me together in peace ! — there is nothing for it but that we 
must part." 

" As you please ! " I answered coldly. " But you will 
allow me to remark that it is very curious and unreason- 
able of you to find such fault vvith me for publicly refus- 
ing to marry one who was certainly not fit to be your 
daughter, or to inhabit the house where my mother died." 

" Don't talk of your mother ! " And such a sudden fury 
lighted his eyes that I involuntarily recoiled. " She would 
have been the first to condemn your behavior as cruel 
and unnatural. Siie had pity, tenderness, and patience 
for every suffering thing ! She was an angel of grace and 
charity! You cannot have much of her nature; and 
truly you seem now to have little of mine ! Some strange 



IVORAfWOOD. 179 

demon seems to inhabit your frame, — and the gener- 
ous, warm-hearted young fellow 1 knew as my son might 
be dead for aught I recognize of him in you/ I do not 
condemn you for refusing to marry Pauline de Charmilles, 
— I condemn you for the manjicr of your refusal ! Enough ! 
— I repeat, we must part, — and the sooner the better ! I 
could not bear to meet the friends we know in your 
company and think of the ruthless barbarity you have dis- 
played towards a fallen and utterly defenceless girl. You 
had best leave Paris and take a twelvemonth's sojourn in 
some other land than this, — I will place plenty of cash 
at your disposal. It is impossible that you should stay on 
here after what has occurred; mon Dicu! — a madman, 
— a drunkard, — a delirious absintheur might be capable of 
such useless ferocity ; — but a man with all his senses about 
him — pah ! it is the action of a beast rather than of 
rational, reasoning human being ! " 

I made no reply. The words " a delirious absintheur 
might be capable of such useless ferocity," reiterated 
themselves over and over again in my ears, and caused 
me to smile ! Of course I might have gone on arguing 
the pros and cons of my case ad infinitum^ from the 
vantage-ground of that particular sort of moral justice I 
had chosen to take my stand upon, — but I was not in the 
humor for it, — besides which, my father was too in- 
dignant to be argued with. 

Arrived at our own house, our man-servant Dunois 
greeted us with a surprised face, and the information that 
the Cur^, M. Vaudron, " looking very ill," was waiting in 
the library. 

" There is no marriage ? " he questioned, gazing at us 
open-eyed. 

" None, Dunois ! " returned my father sharply. " Ma- 
demoiselle is not well ; it is postponed ! " 

Oh, famous old courtier ! He would tell a lie thus to 
his own servant, just to shield a woman's reputation a 
moment longer ! There are a good many men like him 
— I used to be of a similar disposition till the " fairy 
with the green eyes " taught me more worldly wisdom ! 

" I will see poor Vaudron alone," he said, addressing me 
stiffly as Dunois retired. " His grief must be beyond ex- 
pression, — and he can dispense with more than one wit- 
ness of it," 



i8o Wormwood. 

I bowed — and ascended the staircase leisurely to my 
own room. Once shut in there alone, I was seized with 
an uncontrollable fit of laughter ! How absurd it all 
seemed ! What a triumph of pathos ! To think of all those 
fine birds of Parisian society flocking to see a grand 
wedding, and coming in for a great scandal instead ! And 
the pride of the De Charmilles ! — where was it now ? 
Down in the dust ! — down, down like the lilies of France, 
never to bloom white and untarnished again ! What a 
terrified fool the old Count had looked when I made my 
formal rejection ! — and as for Pauline — she w^as not Pau- 
line ! — she was a ghost ! — a spectre without feeling, voice 
or voluntary movement ! All the life she had was in her 
eyes, — great reproachful blue eyes ! — they haunted me 
like twin burning sapphires hung in a vault of darkness ! 

Sitting listlessly in an arm-chair at my window, I 
looked out, doing nothing, but simply thinking, and try- 
ing to disentangle the thronging images that rose one 
after the other with such confusing haste in my brain. I 
wondered what my father and old Vaudron were talking 
about below ! Me ? Yes ! — no doubt they were shaking 
their gray heads mournfully over my strange wayward- 
ness ! Smiling at the idea, I shut my eyes — and straight- 
way saw a wealth of green and gold and amber flame — 
waves of color that seemed to rise heavingly towards me, 
while faces, lovelier far than mortal ones, floated forth 
and smiled at me in wise approval of all that I had done! 
Opening my eyes again, I gazed into the street, — the 
people passed hither and thither, — jingling trams ran by 
with their human freight to and fro, — the soft young 
foliage of the trees shimmered in the bright sun, — it was 
the perfect ideal of a marriage-day ! And in my heart of 
hearts a wondrous wedlock was consummated, — an indis- 
soluble union with the fair wild Absinthe-witch of my 
dreams 'i — she and she alone should be part of my flesh 
and blood from henceforth, I swore ! — why, even the 
words of the marriage-ritual could be made to serve our 
needs ! "Those whom God hath joined let no man put 
asunder ! " God — or Chance / They are both one and 
the same thing — to the ahsintheur / 

Watching the street with drowsy unintelligent eyes I 
presently saw my father and Mo Vaudron come out of 
the house and cross the road together. The old Curd's 



WOJ^MIVOOD. i8f. 

head was bent, — he appeared to walk with difficulty, and 
he was evidently more tiian half supported by my father's 
stalwart arm. Respectable old fellows both — with warm 
hearts and clear consciences ! — wonderful ! It seemed 
so absurd to me that any one should try to lead an un- 
corrupt life in such a corrupt world ! What was the use 
of it ? Was there any possible end but death to all this 
aggressive loving-kindness and charity towards one's 
fellow-men ? Yet a faint sense of admiration stirred me, 
as I looked after the slowly retreating figures of the two 
old friends ; and a lingering regret just touched my heart 
as with a pin's prick to think that my father's indignation 
should have made him resolve to send me from him so 
suddenly. Not only was I sorry to lose his always agree- 
able and intellectual companionship, — I felt instinctively 
that when I bade hi77i farewell, I should also bid farewell 
to the last link that held me to the rapidly vanishing 
shadow of honor. 

Tired of the whirling confusion of my thoughts, I shut 
my eyes once more, and allowed my senses to slip into 
the spectral land of visions, — and my brain-wanderings 
took me so far, that when I started back to common- 
place reality at last, I was in total darkness. I had not 
been asleep — that I knew well enough ! — but I had been 
actively dreaming, — and the afternoon was over. Night 
had descended upon me all unawares, — and suddenly 
seized with a nervous terror at the silence and obscurity 
of my room, I groped about for matches, trembling like a 
leaf and afraid of I knew not what. Not finding what I 
sought, and unable to resist the fantastic horror of myself 
that had stolen over me, I flung open the door wildly, 
and to my intense relief, admitted a flood of light from 
the gas-lamps in the outer hall. Just as I did so, my 
father's voice cried suddenly — 

" Gaston ! Gaston ! " 

He had come back then, I mused hazily. What did he 
want 77ie for, — me, the " pariah " of Parisian society, re- 
jected because I had dared to make a woman's vice 
public ! My mouth was parched and dry — I could not 
answer him immediately. 

" Gaston ! Gaston ! " he called for the second time, and 
there was a sharp ring of pain in his tone. 

Without reply, I descended the stairs, — entered the 



l82 WORMWOOD. 

library, — and there, to my amazement, came face to face 
with Heloise St. Cyr ! Pale, impassioned, wondrousiy 
beautiful in grief, she stood beside my father whose face 
was full of grave and pitying sympathy, — great tears were 
in her eyes, — and as soon as she saw me she gave me no 
time to speak, but sprang forward, extending her hands 
appealingly. 

" Oh. M. Gaston, help me ! " she cried sobbingly. 
" Help me — and I will forgive all your cruelty to poor 
Pauline ! only help me to find her ! — she has left us 1 — 
she has gone 1 — and we know not where 1 " 



^yoKMWooD 1.1^3 



XIX. 

I GAZED at her a moment in blank silence ; — then, re* 
membering that she, even she was the same fair woman, 
who had but lately cursed me, — I rallied my forces and 
smiled a little. 

"Gone!" I echoed. '' Biejt f I fail to see what diffi- 
culty you can possibly have in tracing her, mademoiselle ! 
She has only fled to her lover! ' 

As I said this with freezing tranquillity, H^loise suddenly 
gave way, and breaking into smothered sobbing, hid her 
face on my father's arm. 

" Oh, I hope," she cried piteously. " I hope God is 
more merciful than man ! Oh, what shall I do, vjhdiX. shall 
I do! My poor, poor Pauline ! — alone at night in Paris! 
— such a little, soft, timid thing ! Oh, cruel, cruel ! She 
would never go to Silvion Guidel, now he has become a 
priest — never ! — and see — see. Monsieur Beauvais, what 
she has written here," — and, addressing herself to my 
father, she drew from her bosom a little crumpled note 
and unfolded it. " I had left her," she sobbed, " lying on 
her own bed, after we had carried her upstairs in her 
swoon, — and when I came back after attending to my 
aunt who is very, very ill, she had gone ! Her bridal dress 
was thrown aside, — she had not taken one of her jewels,— 
and I do not think she had any money. Only a little 
black dress and cloak and hat were missing from her 
wardrobe, — and this letter I found on her table. In it she 
says " — here Heloise tried to master her tears, and, steady- 
ing her voice, she read — " Try to forgive me, darling 
Heloise ; you are so good that you will even pity those 
who are wicked. Never think of me again except when 
you say your prayers, — then ask God just once to be kind 
to your little Pauline." 

My father's old eyes brimmed over ; — his heart was 
touched, but not mine ! I sat down leisurely, and looked 
on as unconcernedly as a cynical critic looks on at a new 
play. 

" Poor child — poor child ! " murmured my father 



t84 tVORMiVOOD. 

huskily ; then he turned towards me. *' Have you nothing 
to say, Gaston ? — no suggestion to make ? " 

I shrugged my shoulders. 

" Absolutely ; I am powerless in the matter," I said 
coldly. " I am in a very peculiar position myself, — a 
position which neither you nor Mademoiselle St. Cyr seem 
at all to recognize. I am a wronged man, — yet I receive 
not the slightest sympathy for my wrong, — all the compas- 
sion and anxiety being, oddly enough, bestowed on the per- 
petrators of the injury done to me. I confess therefore, 
that I am not particularly interested in the present denoue' 
ment!'' 

Hdloise looked straight at me, and then, suddenly ap 
proaching me, laid her hand on my arm. 

" After all, did you never love Pauline ? " she asked. 

At this question my blood rose to fever-heat, and I 
spoke, scarcely knowing what I was saying. 

" Love her ! " I cried. " I loved her with such a passion 
as she never knew ! I hallowed her with a worship such 
as she never dreamt of ! She was everything to me — life, 
love, hope, salvation ! — and you ask me if I loved her ! 
Oh, foolish woman ! you cannot measure the love I had 
for her ! — such love that, once betrayed must and ever will 
turn to loathing for its betrayer ! " 

My father looked startled at this sudden outburst of 
feeling on my part, — but Hdloise did not flinch. Her gray 
eyes shone upon me through the mist of tears as stead- 
fastly as stars. 

" Such love is not love a<- all ! " she said. " It is selfish- 
ness ; — no more ! The injury done to yon appears all par- 
amount, — you have no thought, no pity for the injury done 
to he?'. The world is still open to you ; but on her it is 
shut forever. You may sin as she has sinned, without 
even the plea of an overwhelming passion to excuse you, — 
and society will not turn its back ox\.you / But it will scorn 
her for the evil it endures in you and in all men I Such is 
humanity's scant justice ! If you had ever loved her truly, 
you would have forgotten your own wrong in her misery ; 
you would have raised her up, not crushed her down lower 
than she already was ; you would have saved her, not de- 
stroyed her ! I warned you long ago that she was a creat- 
ure of impulse, too young and too inexperienced to be 
certain of her own mind in the perplexities of love or mar*, 



WORMWOOD. 185 

riage ; but you paid no heed to my warning. And now, 
she is ruined, — desolate ! — a mere child cast out on the 
cruel wilderness of Paris all alone ; — think of it, Gaston 
Beauvais ! — think of it ! — and take comfort in the thought 
that you have had your miserable revenge to the uttermost 
end of man's cowardice ! " 

Every word fell from her lips with a quiet decisiveness 
that stung me in spite of my enforced calm ; but I re- 
strained myself, and when she had finished speaking, I 
simply bowed and .miled. 

" Your brave and eloquent words, mademoiselle, make 
me regret that I was so unwise as to love your cousin in- 
stead of yourself ! It was a serious mistake ! — for both of 
us, perhaps ! " 

She drew back, — the color flushing proudly to her 
cheeks, — and her look of indignation, surprise, reproach, 
and anguish dazzled and confounded me for an instant. 
What chance arrow had sped to its mark now ? I won- 
dered vaguely, — I had nigh insulted her by my remark, — 
and yet grief expressed itself in her eyes more than anger. 
Had she ever cared for me ? — Not possible ! she had al- 
ways mistrusted me, — and now she hated me ! With 
supreme disdain, she turned from me to my father. 

" I must go home now, Monsieur Beauvais " — she said 
quietly and with dignity — '* I have come here on a useless 
errand I see ! Will you take me to the carriage ? — it is 
in waiting. My uncle does not yet know of Pauline's 
flight ; we are afraid to tell him ; — and we thought — 
my aunt and I — that perhaps you might help us to some 
clue " She hesitated, and nearly broke down again. 

" My dear girl " — returned my father, hastily offering 
her his arm in obedience to her mute sign — " be certain 
that if I hear the slightest rumor that may lead you on 
the right track, you shall know it at once. I will make 
every possible private inquiry ; — alas, alas ! what an un- 
fortunate day it was for everybody when that nephew of 
my poor old friend Vaudron came to Paris ! Who would 
have thought it ! Vaudron is broken-hearted ; he would 
as soon have believed in an angel turning traitor, as that 
his favorite Silvion would have been guilty of such de- 
ception and cruelty. But whatever his grief, I know he 
will assist us in the search for Pauline ; that you may be 
sure of. Try, try to take comfort my dear; you mus^ 



:S6 "■ WORMWOOD. 

not give way. There is always the hope that the poor 
child may be terrified at her sudden loneHness, and may 
write to you and tell you where she is." 

Thus talking, he led her out of the room, — she passed 
me without acknowledging my presence by the slightest 
gesture of farewell ; and I waited, sitting near the table 
and turning over the newspapers, till I heard the carriage 
drive away, and my father's returning steps echoed slowly 
along the hall. He entered the room, sat down, and was 
silent for many minutes. I felt that he was looking at 
me intently. Presently he said with some sharpness — 

" Gaston ! " 

" Sir ? " 

" Are you satisfied with the evil you have done ? " 

I smiled. 

" Really, mon pere, you talk as if I were the only crim. 
inal in the matter ! There are others " 

" And they are punished ! " he declared passionately. 
" Punished more bitterly than most people are for their 
misdeeds ; and the heavist punishment has fallen on the 
weakest offender, thanks to you ! As for Silvion GuidM, 
you may depend upon it, he is a prey to the deepesf 
remorse and misery ! " 

" You think so ? " I queried languidly, without raising 
my eyes. *' Now I should fancy he finds quite sufficient 
atonement for his sins in the muttering of an ^ Ave^ or 
Pater-noster.^^ 

" I tell you he suffers /^^ and my father struck his 
hand emphatically on the table, — "I have studied his 
nature, and I know he has the scholar's mind, — the subtle 
and self-tormenting disposition vs^hich is always a curse 
to its owner ! He has behaved I'lke a coward and a villain, 
and he knows it ! But you, — you also have behaved 
like a coward and a villain, and you do not seem to know 
it!" 

" No ! — you are right ; " I responded calmly. " I do 
not ! " 

*' Dieti ! Have you no heart ? " 

" None ! " and 1 fixed my eyes quietly upon him. 
"How should you expect it.'* I gave what heart I had 
to my betrothed wife, and she has killed it. It is stone 
dead ! I forget that it ever existed ! Pray do not let us 
talk any more of the matter, mon plre ; I am perfectly 



WORAflVOOD, 187 

content to leave Paris for a time as you suggest, — indeed 
1 think tlie plan an admirable one. It will certainly be 
best that I should remove my presence from you, and 
from all to whom I have suddenly become obnoxious. 
But, before we part, I will ask you to remember, first, — 
that I have never wilfully, through all my life, given you 
a moment's cause for pain or reproach, — and secondly, 
that in this rupture of a marriage which was to have been 
the completion of life's happiness for me, I am guiltless 
of anything save a desire to wreak just punishment on 
the betrayers of my honor. Thirdly, that the only offence 
you can charge against me is, a want of sympathy with a 
dishonored woman, who has not only confessed, but 
almost glories in her dishonor ! " 

With that I saluted him profoundly and left him to his 
own reflections. I had shown no heat — I had displayed 
no temper — I had stated my case with the coolest 
logic — the logic of an absintheur ! But once up again in 
the solitude of my own room with the door shut fast, I 
laughed aloud and bitterly at the persistent and ridic- 
ulous wrong-sidedness with which everybody insisted 
on viewing the whole affair. All the pity was for 
Pauline ! and yet people would go on prating about 
" morality ! " Judged strictly, Pauline de Charmilles had 
not a shadow of defence on her side ; but because she 
was young, beautiful, and a woman,* her fate excited 
sympathy. Had she been ugly and misshapen, she 
might have been scourged and driven from pillar to 
post till she died of sheer exhaustion for aught any one 
would have cared ! We are most of us ruled by the flesh 
and the devil ; and very few of us have any real con- 
ception of justice. 

But do not imagine, good friends, that I, a confirmed 
drinker of absinthe, want to be moral ! Not I ! I 
should win scanty attenton from some of you, if I did ! 
I only observe to you, e?t passant, that, considering how 
the barriers between vice and virtue are being fast 
broken down in all great " civilized " countries ; how, 
even in eminently virtuous and respectable '' Albion " — 
women of known disreputable character are allowed to 
enter and mix with the highest aristocratic circles, — and 
how it will most probably soon be necessary to establish 
in church-going London and under the very nose of good 



1 88 WORMWOOD. 

Mrs. Grundy, a recognized demi-monde after the fashion 
of my dear Paris, — in the face of all these facts, I say, 
surely it is time to leave off sermonizing about dull 
household virtues ! — an age of Realism and Zola has no 
time for them ! But whatever you may think of my 
opinions, — opinions born of blessed absinthe ; — sit in 
judgment on yourselves, my readers, before you venture 
to judge me t Believe me, I used, like many other young 
men, to have my ideals of greatness and goodness ; the 
beautiful, the mystical, the impersonal and sublime had 
attractions for my spirit; but the wise "green fairy" has 
cured me of this unworldly foolishness. Formerly, I 
loved to read noble poetry ; I could lose myself in in- 
ward communion with the divine spirit of Plato and 
other thinkers grand and true as he, — but now ! now, I 
grin in company with the " educated " masses over the 
indecent wit of the cheap Paris press, — now, like un 
vrai absintheur I enjoy a sneer at virtue, — now, like 
many of my class who wish to "go with the time," I 
fling a stone or a handful of mud at any one presuming 
to live a cleaner and greater life than his fehows. I am 
one of your " newer " generation, you poor old world ! — 
the generation under which you groan as you roll 
silently on in your fate-appointed orbit ; the generation 
of brute-selfishness, littleness, and godlessness, — the 
generation of the finite Ego opposed to infinite Eter- 
nities ! I please myself in the way I live, I am an- 
swerable to none other ! And you, dear reader, whose 
languid eyes rest carelessly on this printed page, — entre 
nous soit die! — do XioX. you follow the same wise rule t Is 
not your every thought, idea, and plan, however much it 
it may at first seem for the benefit of others, really for 
your own ultimate interest and good .'' Uf course ! 
Excellent ! Let us then metaphorically shake hands 
upon our declared brotherhood, — for though you may be, 
and no doubt are, highly respectable, while I am all 
together disreputable, — though you may be everything 
that society approves, while I am an absinthe-drini<ing 
outcast from polite life, a skulking pi^^'iah of the slums 
and back streets of Paris, we are botl' at one — yes, my 
dear friend, I assure you, — entire!)^ at one 1 — in thd 
worship of Self 1 



WORMIVOOD, 189 



XX. 

Next day I remembered I had a visit to make. The 
Comte de Charmillcs expected me to call upon him be- 
fore noon. I meant to go, of course ; 1 had no wish to 
disappoint him 1 I was prepared for a stormy scene with 
him ; I could already picture the haughty old aristocrat's 
wounded pride and indignation at the dishonor brought 
on his name, — but I could not quite imagine what he 
would be likely to say. Certes, he could not excuse his 
daughter or her partner in iniquity ; he might pour out 
his wrath upon me for making the affair public to all his 
friends and acquaintance, but that would be the utmost 
he could do. I determined to hear him out with the 
utmost patience and courtesy, — my quarrel was not with 
him, — he had never given me offence, save by his stupid 
Royalist tendencies and bigoted Catholicism, — and it was 
quite enough for me, a nineteenth century Republican, to 
have lowered his pride and broken it,— I wanted nothing 
more so far as he was concerned ! Before starting on my 
ceremonious errand, I packed a few clothes and other 
necessaries in my portmanteau ready for immediate de- 
parture from home, and this done, I went in search of my 
father. He was just preparing to leave the house for his 
Usual duties at the Bank, and he looked fagged and 
wearied. He lifted his eyes and regarded me steadily as 
I approached him — his lips quivered, and, suddenly laying 
his hand on my shoulder, he said — 

" Gaston, it goes to my old heart to part with you ! — 
for I love you ! But something has embittered arid 
crossed your once sweet and generous nature ; and though 
I have thought about it anxiously all night, I have still 
come to- the same conclusion, — namely, that it will be 
best for us both that we should separate for a time, espe- 
cially under the unhappy circumstances that have just 
taken place. The whole position is too painful for every- 
body concerned ! And I am quite ready to admit that the 
suffering you have personally undergone has been, and is, 
of a nature to chafe and exasperate your feelings. Change 
of scene and different surroundings will do much for you^ 



190 WORMWOOD. 

mon gar^on, — and this miserable esdandre will possibly 
die out during your absence. Choose your own time for 
going " 

" I have chosen it," — I interrupted him quietly — *' I 
shall leave you to-day." 

An expression of sharp pain contracted his fine old 
features for a moment, — then apparently rallying his self- 
possession, he returned — 

" Soit ! It is perhaps best ! You will find a note 
from me in your desk in the library ; I have thought it 
wisest to give you at once a round sum sufficient for pres- 
ent needs. Your share in the Bank as my partner natu- 
rally continues, — and shall be religiously set aside for your 
use on your return. I do not know whether you have any 
idea of a destination, — I should suggest your visiting 
England for a time." 

I smiled. 

" Thanks ! I am too truly French in my sympathies 
to care for the British climate. No ! — if, like a new Cain, 
I am to be a vagabond on the face of the earth, I will 
wander as far as my fancy takes me ; Africa, par example 
presents boundless forests, where, if one chose, one could 
almost lose one's very identity ! " 

My father's eyes flashed a keen and sorrowful reproach 
into mine. 

" Mon Jils, why speak so bitterly ? Is it necessary to 
add an extra pang to my grief 1 " 

A sudden impulse moved me to softer emotion, — taking 
his hand I kissed it respectfully. 

" Mon pere, I regret beyond all words that I am un- 
happily the cause of any distress to you ! We part ; — and 
it is no doubt advisable, as you say, that we should do so, 
— for a time ; but in bidding you farewell I will ask you 
to think of me at my best, — and to believe that there is 
no man in all the world whom I admire and honor more 
than yourself ! Sentiment between men is ridiculous I 

know, but " I kissed his hand once more, and I felt 

his fingers tremble as they clung for a moment to mine. 

" God bless thee, Gaston ! " he murmured. " And, 
stay ! — let me have time to think again ! Do not leave 
Paris yet — wait till to-morrow ! " 

I made a half sign of assent — but uttered no promise ; 
and watched him with a curious forsaken feeling, as with 



IVORMIVOOD. 191 

a kindly yet wistful last look at me, he left the house and 
walked rapidly along on his usual way to business. Should 
I ever dwell with him again in the old frank familiarity 
of intercourse that had made us more like comrades than 
father and son ? I doubted it ! Afy life was changed, — 
my road lay down a dark side-turning; his continued fair 
and open, with the full sunshine of honor lighting it to the 
end ! 

Entering the library, I looked in my desk for the packet 
my father had mentioned, and found it, — a bulky envelope 
containing French notes to the amount of what would be 
about five hundred pounds in English money. I took 
possession of these, — and then wrote a note to my father, 
thanking him for his generosity, and bidding him farewell, 
while, to satisfy him as to my destination, I added that it 
was my immediate intention to visit Italy. A lie of course ! 
— I had no such intention ; I never meant to leave Paris, 
but of this hereafter. I then finished my packing and 
other preparations, and went out of the dear old house 
at Neuilly with scarce a regret, — not realizing, as I 
afterwards realized, that I should never, never enter it 
again ! 

Hailing a passing carriage I bade the driver take me 
to the Gare de PEst Our man-servant Dunois, who put 
my portmanteau into the vehicle and watched my depart- 
ure more or less curiously, heard me give this order, 
which was precisely what I wanted. I knew he would 
repeat it to my father, who by this means would receive 
the impression that I had carried out my written inten- 
tion, and departed for Italy by the Lucerne and Chiasso 
route to Milan. Arrived at the Gare, I put my portman- 
teau in charge of the official to whom such baggage is 
consigned for safekeeping — and then I leisurely pro- 
ceeded to retrace my route on foot, till I reached the 
residence of the Comte de Charmilles. The very outside 
of the great house looked dreary, some of the blinds 
were dow^n, — there was a deserted melancholy aspect 
about it that was doubly striking in comparison with the 
glitter and brilliancy that had surrounded it on the pre- 
vious day. The maid who opened the door to me looked 
scared and miserable as though she had been up all 
night, — and, murmuring under her breath and with 
averted eyes that her master had been expecting me for 



X92 



WORMWOOD, 



some time, she showed me into the Count's private study 
and announced me by name. The Count himself was 
sitting in his arm-chair, his back turned towards me, — his 
figure rigidly erect, — and he gave no sign of having heard 
my entrance. 

The servant departed noiselessly, closing the door be- 
hind her, — and I stood irresolute, waiting for him to 
speak. But he uttered not a word. All at once my eyes 
lighted on a case of pistols open on the table, — from the 
position and appearance of the weapons, I saw they were 
loaded and ready for use. The situation flashed upon 
me in an instant, and I smiled with some contempt as I 
realized it. This foolish old man — this withering stump 
of ancient French chivalry, — had actually resolved to 
fight out the question of his daughter's honor with me, 
face to face ! Was ever such a mad scheme ! What a 
Don Quixote of a father to be sure ! If he had taken up 
arms for a stage mistress now, — if he had risen in eager 
defence of some coarse painted dancing woman, whose 
nearly nude body was on view to the public for so many 
francs per night, one would not have blamed him, or 
thought him ridiculous, — no, not in Paris ! But to think 
of fighting a duel for merely a daughter's reputation ! — 
Dieu ! it was a freak worthy of laughter ! Yet there was 
a touch of the romantic and pathetic about it that moved 
me in spite of myself — though of course I determined to 
refuse his challenge. I did not want to shed the blood 
of that old white-haired man ! But suppose he still 
persisted.'' Well, then I must defend myself, and if I 
killed him, it would be unfortunate, but it could not be 
helped. The idea of his dispatching me never entered 
my head. There was something in me^ or so I imagined, 
that could not be killed ! — not yet ! 

Meanwhile the subject of my musings remained im- 
movably silent, — and I began rather to wonder at such 
obstinate taciturnity. His indomitable pride had met 
with a terrific fall, I reflected 1 — probably he found it 
difficult to begin the conversation. I advanced a little. 

" M. de Charmilles ! You bade me come to you, and 
I am here ! " 

He made no answer. His left hand, thin and wrinkled, 
rested on the carved oak arm of the chair, and 1 thought 
1 saw it tremble ever so slightly. Was his rage so great 



JVOA'MIVOO/). 193 

that it had rendered him absolutely speechless ? I moved 
a few stops nearer. 

" M. de Charmilles ! " I repeated, raising my voice a 
little — '' I am here — Gaston Beauvais. Have you any- 
thing to say to me ? " 

No answer ! A vague awe seized me, and instinctively 
hushing my footsteps, I approached and ventured to 
touch the fingers that were lightly closed round the arm 
of the chair, — they were warm, but they did not move, — 
only the diamond signet on the third finger glittered 
coldly like a wintry star. 

" M. de Charmilles ! " I said loudly once more ; then, 
mastering the curious sensation of terror that held me 
momentarily inert and uncertain what to do, I went res- 
olutely forward and round, so that I could look him full 
in the face. As I did so I recoiled with an involuntary 
exclamation ; the old man's features were rigid and blood- 
less, — the eyes were wide open, fixed and glassy, though 
they appeared to stare at me with an expression of calm 
and freezing disdain, — the lips were parted in a stern 
smile, — and the fine white hair was slightly roughened 
about the forehead as though a hand had been lately 
pressed there to still some throbbing ache. A frozen 
figure of old-world dignity he sate, surveying me, or so it 
seemed, in speechless but majestic scorn ; while I, for 
one amazed, breathless moment stood confronting him, 
overpowered by the cold solemnity and grandeur of his 
aspect. Then — all suddenly — the set jaw dropped ; the 
ghastly look of Death darkened the erstwhile tranquil 
countenance ; and myawe gave way to the wildest nerv- 
ous horror. Springing to the bell I rang it violently 
and incessantly ; the servants flocked in, and in a few 
seconds the room was a scene of confusion and lamenta- 
tion. As in a dream I saw the Comtesse de Charmilles 
feebly totter in and distractedly fall on her knees by her 
husband's passive form ; I saw He'loise busying herself 
in chafing her uncle's yet warm hands — I heard the 
sound of convulsive sobbing ; — and then I became dimly 
aware of a physician's presence, and of the sudden hush 
of suspense following his arrival. A brief examination 
sufficed ; — the \vords " II est mort ! " though uttered in 
the lowest whisper, reached the ears of the desolate 
Countess who^ with a long shuddering wail of agony, 



194 



WORMWOOD. 



sank senseless at the dead man's feet. It was all over !-^ 
some little vessel in the heart had snapt, — some little 
subtle chord in the brain had given way under the pres- 
sure of strong indignation, grief, and excitement, — and 
the proud old aristocrat had gone to that equalizing dust 
where there is neither pride nor shame ! He was dead, 
— and some narrow-minded fools may consider, if they 
like, that / killed him. But how 1 What crime had I 
committed.^ None! I had merely made a stand for 
moral law in social life ! My career was stainless, save 
for the green trail of the absinthe-slime which no one 
saw. And Society never blames vice that does not 
publicly offend. Pauline was the sinner, — little, child- 
like, blue-eyed Pauline ! — and I took a sort of grim and 
awful pleasure in regarding her as ?l parricide ! Why be- 
cause she had a sweet face, a slim form and a bright 
smile, should she escape from the results of her own 
treachery and crime t I could not see it then, — and I 
cannot see it even now ! No one can make me respon- 
sible for the old Count's death,-— no one I say ! — though at 
times, his white, still, majestic face confronts me in the 
darkness with a speechless reproach and undying chal- 
lenge. But I know it is only a phantasm ; and I quickly 
take refuge in the truth as declared by the fashionable 
world of Paris when his death became generally known, 
— namely, that his daughter's dishonor (not my proc- 
lamation of it, observe !) had broken his heart ; — and 
that even so, broken-hearted for her sake, he died. 



WOKMWOOD, X95 



XXI. 

From this period I may begin to date my inpid down- 
ward career, — a career that however disreputable and 
strange it may seem to those who elect to be virtuous 
and self-controlled, has brought to me, personally, the 
wildest and most unpurchasable varieties of pleasure. 
Pleasure, such as a forest-savage may know when the 
absolute freedom of air, woodland, and water, is his, — 
when no laws bind him, — and when he has no one to 
whom he is bound to account for his actions. I hate 
your smug, hypocritical civilization, good world ! — I 
would rather be what I am, than play the double part 
your rules of life enjoin ! I am an alien from all re- 
spectability ; what then 1 Respectability is generally 
dull ! And I am nev^er dull ; my Absinthe-witch takes 
care of that ! Her kaleidoscope of vision is exhaustless, 
— and though of late she has shown me the same sights 
somewhat too often, I am perchance, the most to blame 
for this, — the tenacity of my own brain holding fast 'o 
certain images that it would be best to forget. This is 
the fault of my constitution, — a tendency to remember, 
— I cannot forget, if I would, and whereas on some 
temperaments the emerald nectar bestows oblivion, on 
mine it sharpens and intensifies memory. Nevertheless 
the feverish excitation of pleasure never dies out, and 
my disposition is such that I am able to brood on things 
that would appal most men with the keenest and most 
appreciative delight ! It is not perhaps agreeable, is it, 
to peaceable and right-minded people to dwell gloating 
on the harrowing details of a murder, for instance "i To 
me, however, it is not only agreeable, but absolutely 
fascinating, — and I have merely to shut my eyes to see 
— what } Water glimmering in the moonlight, — trees 
waving in the wind — and a face upturned to the quiet 
skies drifting steadily and helplessly down stream, — but, 
stop ! I must not brood too tenderly upon this picture 
yet ; — but it is difficult to me sometimes to keep my 
thoughts in sequence. No absi?itheur can be always 



t^6 WORMWOOD. 

coherent ; it is too much to expect of the green fairy's 
votaries ! 

Well ! the Comte de Charmilles was dead, — and a 
whole fortnight had elapsed since his funeral had wound 
its solemn black length through the streets of Paris to 
Pbre-la-Chaise, where the family vai.lt had opened its 
stone jaws to receive the mortal remains of him who 
was the last male heir of his race. His great house was 
shut up as a house of mourning ; the widowed Comtesse 
and her niece He'loise dwelt there together, so I learned, 
in melancholy solitude, denying themselves to all vis- 
itors. Under any other circumstances they would most 
probably have left the city, and sought in change of scene 
a relaxation from grief, but / knew why they remained 
immured in their desolate town mansion, — simply in the 
hope that now, having nothing to fear from the wrath of 
her father, the lost Pauline might return to her home. 

And I — I also was still in Paris. As I said before, 
I had never for a moment intended to leave it. I had 
formed certain plans of my own respecting the wild new 
mode of life I purposed to follow, — and these plans I 
was able to carry out with entire success. I took a small 
apartment in an obscure hotel under an assumed name, 
and in my daily and nightly rambles, I carefully kept to 
the back streets, partly to avoid a chance meeting with 
any of my acquaintance, and partly under the impression 
that in one of these poorer quarters of Paris I should 
find Pauline. I had no idea what I should do if I really 
did happen to discover her whereabouts, — part of the 
quality of one in my condition of absi?ithism, is that he 
cannot absolutely decide anything too long beforehand. 
When the time for decision comes, he acts as suddenly 
as a wild beast springs, — on impulse — needless to add 
that the impulse is always more or less evil. 

A fortnight is not a long time is it ? — ^save to children 
and parted lovers, — yet it had sufficed me to make deadly 
progress in my self-chosen method of enjoying existence ; 
so much so, in fact, that nothing in the world seemed to 
me of real importance provided absinthe never failed. 1 
chink, at this particular juncture, that if any one possess- 
ing the power to deny me the full complement of the 
nectar which was now as necessary to me as the blood in 
my veins, had denied it, I should have killed him on the 



WORMWOOD. 197 

spot without a moment's compunction ! But fortunately, 
absinthe is obtainable everywhere in Paris, — it is not a 
costly luxury either, — and I soon became familiar with 
the different haunts where the most potent forms of it 
were obtainable. It must of course be understood by the 
inquisitive reader, that the effects of this divine cordial 
are different on different temperaments. On the densely 
stupid brain it can only render the stupefaction more 
complete. The habituated Chinese opium-eater, for 
example, gets no dreams out of his drug, his own mind 
being too slow and sluggish for the creation of any sort of 
vision. But, put a quick-witted Frenchman or Italian in 
an Oriental opium-den, and the poison-fumes will invoke 
for him a crowd of phantom images, horrible or beautiful, 
according to the tendency of his thoughts. So with 
absinthe. Only that absinthe differs from opium in this 
respect, — namely that it has not only one but three dis- 
tinct gradations of action. Imagine, for the sake of meta* 
phor, the brain to be a musical instrument, well strung 
and in perfect tune, — absinthe first deade^is the vibrating 
power ; then, one by one, reverses the harmonies ; and 
finally, completely alters the very nature of the sounds. 
Music can still be drawn from it, — but it is a different 
music to what it erstwhile was capable of. On the active 
brain, its effect is to quicken the activity to feverishness, 
while hurling it through new and extraordinary channels 
of thought ; on a slow brain it quenches whatever feeble 
glimmer of intelligence previously existed there, the result 
in such a case, being frequently cureless idiotcy. But 
what does this matter .? Its charm is irresistible for both 
wit and fool ; and in this age, when to follow our own 
immediate desires is the only accepted gospel, — the gos- 
pel of Paris at least, if of no other city, absinthe is to 
many, as to me, the chief necessity of life. Because, 
however uncertain in its other phases it may prove, it can 
be absolutely relied upon to kill Conscience ! 

I lived on from day to day in my hidden retirement, 
perfectly contented with my lot, and doing nothing what- 
ever but dreamily wander about the byeways of the city, 
looking for Pauline. Yet I could not have told any one 
why I looked for her. I did not want her. Nevertheless, 
reason or no reason, the impulse of search continued , 
and every woman of youthful and shrinking appearance I 



198 WORMWOOD. 

met, came in for my dose and eager scrutiny. Once or 
twice in my lonely walks I saw Heloise St. Cyr, robed in 
deepest black and closely veiled, and I guessed by the 
character of the places in which I encountered her, that 
she also was seeking for the lost one. She never saw me, 
— for I always slunk away in swift avoidance of any pos- 
sible glance of recognition from her beautiful disdainful 
eyes. And, as I have stated, a fortnight had elapsed, — 
when, one evening, an irresistible yearning came over me 
to take a stroll in the direction of Neuilly — to pass the old 
house of my other days, — to look up at the windows on 
the chance of seeing merely the shadow of my father's 
figure silhouetted by the lamp-light on the drawn blind. 
He thought me far away by this time, and was no doubt 
surprised and irritated at receiving no letters from me. I 
wondered if he were solitary ? — if he regretted the loss of 
my companionship 1 Yielding to my fancy, I started on 
the well-known route which I had up till now carefully 
avoided. I stopped now and then to reinvigorate my 
forces with the absinthe-fire that I fully believed was the 
only thing that kept me alive, but once I had passed all 
the cafes where the best form of that elixir was obtain- 
able, I continued my road steadily and without interrup- 
tion along the Champs Elysees. 

It was a fine night ; the trees were in full foliage ; a 
few stray birds twittered sleepily among the branches, 
and under the light of the soft moon, many an amorous 
couple wandered to and fro, entranced in each other's 
society, and telling each other the same old lies of love 
and perpetual constancy that all wise men laugh at. I 
walked slowly, — following, as I always followed, the flicker- 
ing rays of green that trembled on my path, — to-night they 
took the shape of thin arrows that pointed forward, — ever 
forward and straight on ! Neuilly at last ! — and a few min- 
utes more brought me to the house I had so lately known as 
" home." All the windows were empty of light save that 
of the library, — and here the blind was only half down, so 
that I was able to see my father through it, busily writing. 
His table was strewn with papers ; he looked fatigued 
and careworn, — and for one brief second my heart smote 
me. Troublesome conscience was not quite dead ; yon- 
der old man's fine, placid yet weary face roused in rr.e a 
struggling passion of regret and remorse. It was a mere 



PVORMWOOD. 199 

flash of pain ! — it soon passed, — I pressed my hand 
heavily over my eyes to still their burning ache, — and 
turning from the liouse, I looked down on the dark as- 
phalte pavement at my feet. There were those little 
flickering green shafts of light pointing ahead as before ! 
— and, careless as to where I went I continued to follow 
in their spectral lead. So I walked on and on ; sur- 
rounded as I went by strange sights and sounds to which 
I had now grown almost accustomed, and which, even at 
their worst brought me much weird and fantastic delight. 
To a great extent, my sensations, though purely imagi- 
nary, seemed real ; nothing could have been more substan- 
tial in appearance than the faces and forms that hovered 
about me, — it was only when I strove to touch them that 
things vanished. But the odd part of it was that I could 
feel them touching me ; kisses were pressed on my lips, — 
soft arms embraced me, — the very breath of these phan- 
toms seemed at times to lift and fan my hair. And more 
real than the faces and forms were the voices I heard ; 
— these never left me alone, — they sang, they talked, they 
whispered, of things strange and terrible, — things that 
might have turned the blood cold in the veins of an honest 
man : — only that I was no longer honest. I knew that ! 
I was neither honest to myself, nor my feelings towards 
the world, — but this did not appear to me at all a matter for 
compunction. Because, after all, there was no one to care 
particularly what my principles were, — no one except my 
father, — and he was an old man, — his term of life would 
soon be ended. Self-respect is the root of honor ; and 
with me self-respect was dead and buried ! I had taken 
to self-indulgence instead. Most men do, if truth were 
told, though their favorite vice may not be the love of 
absinthe. But that nearly every man has some evil propen- 
sity to which he secretly panders, — this is a fact of which 
we may be perfectly sure ! 

For my part, I was quite content to listen to the 
ghastly prattle of the suggestive air-voices about me ; 
and my brain was wondrously quick to conjure up the 
scenes they told me of, — scenes in graves, where the 
pain-tranced man, thought to be dead but living, is 
buried in the haste ordained by the iniquitous French 
law, and struggles choking in his coffin, while the sex- 
ton, fully aware of, yet terrified by his moanS; calmly 



200 PV0/^MIV002>. 

throws the earth over him all the same and levels it 
down ; * — of lazar-houses and dissecting-rooms, and all 
the realistic wonders of obscurity and crime, on which 
the " cultured " Paris public dwells with rapt and ec- 
static interest, — such beauteous things as these were 
as vivid and sweet to me now as they had once been 
repulsive. And so I strolled along under the moon- 
silvered sky, heedless of distance, careless of time, till 
the more brilliant clustering lights of Paris were left 
behind me, and I woke up with a start from my sinis- 
ter musings, to find myself in the quiet little suburb of 
Suresnes. 

Do you know Suresnes ? On a fine summer's after- 
noon it is worth while to journey thither, and walk 
over the bridge, stopping half-way across to look up 
and down at the quietly flowing river, that on the 
right-hand parts with a broad shining ribbon-breadth 
the Bois, and the opposite undulating hills. Down 
almost to the brink of the water slope a few exquisite 
lawns and gardens belonging to those white villas one 
sees glimmering among the rich foliage of the trees ; 
and round by these in a semicircle sweeps the Seine, 
onward and out of sight like the silver robe of a queen 
vanishing into stately distance. To the left is Paris ; 
— a vision of aerial bridge, building and tower, — and at 
times when the sunset is like fire and the wind is still, 
— when the bells chime musically forth the hour, and 
every turret and chimney is bathed in roseate light, one 
might almost imagine it a fairy city, gleaming aloft 
mirage-like, for one marvellous moment, only to disappear 
the next. Once past the bridge you enter the Bois, 
where the open road leads to Longchamps •, but there are 
many nooky paths and quiet corners down under the tall 
trees by the edge of the river itself, where one may bask 
whole hours in happy solitude, — solitude so complete that 
it is easy to imagine oneself miles away from any city. 
Often and often I had wandered hither in my boyhood, 
reading some favorite book or giving myself up to pleas- 
ant day-dreaming and air-castle-building ; yet to-night I 
gazed upon the familiar scene entirely bewildered and with 

* A case of this kind happened near Paris last year. 



IVOJiMlVOOD. aoi 

all the puzzled uncertainty of a stranger ignorant of his 
whereabouts. Suresnes itself was quiet as a crypt; its 
principal caje was shut up and not a single lamp glimmered 
in any window of any house that I could see, — the moon- 
beams alone suvered the roofs and doors and transformed 
the pretty bridge to a sparkling span of light. The tide 
was high, — it made a musical rushing and gurgling as it 
ran ; I leaned upon the bridge-parapet and listened to its 
incessant murmur, half soothed, half pained. Then, 
sauntering slowly, and trying, as I went, to understand 
something of the hushed and spiritual beauty of the land- 
scape, — for this sort of comprehension was daily becoming 
more difficult to me, — I moved on towards the Bois. The 
great leaf-covered trees rustled mysteriously, and min- 
gled their sighs with the liquid warbling of the waters ; — 
there was no living soul to be seen, — this hour of sol- 
emn quietude and rest seemed all for me, and for me 
alone. 

Once across the bridge I paused, looking into the 
further stretches of the woodland. The air was so very 
still, that I could hear the distinct fall of the artificial 
cascade, that, with its adjacent cafij is the scene of many 
a pleasant summer rendezvous ; and, for a moment I 
thought I would walk thus far. Suddenly, with a loud 
silvern clang, a neighboring church clock struck the 
hour — eleven. It sounded more like the Mass-bell than 
a clock chime, — and my thoughts, which were always in 
a scattered and desultory condition, began to swarm like 
bees round the various ideas of religion and worship it 
suggested. I reflected how many a canting hypocrite 
earned dishonest bread by playing a sanctimonious part 
before the so-called sacred altars, — altars polluted by 
such paid service ; how, in every church, in every form of 
creed, men, preaching one thing and openly practising 
another, offered themselves as " Christian examples " 
forsooth to their less professing brethren ; — how smug 
priests and comfortable clergymen, measuring Christianity 
solely as a means whereby to live, profaned the name of 
Christ by the mere utterance of it in their false and 
greedy mouths ; — and how, in these days, religion was 
rendered such a ghastly mockery by its very teachers, 
that it was no wonder if some honest folk preferred to 
believe in no God at all, rather than accept a God ia 



202 WORMWOOD. 

whom His servants could profess to find such incon- 
sistency and absolute lack of principle. 

All at once my thoughts took flight like a flock of 
scared birds, as they often did ; a sick swimming sensa- 
tion in my head made me clutch at the near branch of a 
tree for support, — the whole landscape went round in a 
green circle, and the stars looked pushed forth from the 
sky in jets of flame. All was red, green, and white daz- 
zlement before me for a moment, — and to master this un- 
comfortable faintness which threatened to end in a swoon, 
I moved unsteadily, feeling my way as though I were 
blind, down towards the river's brink. I had an idea 
that I would rest there awhile on the cool grass till I re- 
covered ; and I went towards one of the most sequestered 
and lonely nooks I could just then confusedly remember ; 
a tiny plat of velvety greensward shaded about by huge 
umbrageous elms, where, from the encircling shadows, 
one could look out on the brighter waters, and inhale the 
freshness of whatever light wind there was. I went on 
very feebly, for my senses were in a whirl and seemed on 
the point of deserting me altogether ; I bent aside the 
branches, and slipped between the closely-set and inter- 
twisted trunks in order to gain as speedily as possible the 
spot I sought, — when, as though I had received a par- 
alyzing electric shock I stopped, staring ahead of me in 
doubt, wrath, and wonder ; — a rush of strength was hurled 
into me — a superhuman force that strung up my every 
nerve and sinew to almost breaking tension, — and I 
sprang furiously forward, uttering an oath that was half 
a cry. A man stood near the river's edge, — a man in the 
close black garments of a priest ; and he turned his face, 
fair, cold, and pale, fearlessly towards me as I came. 

" You — you ! " I whispered hoarsely, for rage choked 
my voice, — " You^ here^ — Silvion Guideli " 



WORMWOOD, «03 



XXII. 

His eyes rested on me quietly, almost indifferently ; 
dense, dark, weary eyes they were that night ! — and he 
sighed. 

" Yes, I am here," he said slowly. " I have tried to 
keep away, but in the end I could not. Is she well ? " 
I stared at him, — too maddened by wrath and amaze- 
ment for the moment to speak. He, never removing his 
gaze from me, repeated his question anxiously — 

" Tell me, is she well ? I have no right to know, 
perhaps, — you are her husband, — but I — I was her 
lover, God forgive me ! — and again I ask, — is she well ? " 

He was ignorant then of all that had happened ! As 
this fact forced itself on my comprehension, my fury froze 
into sinister calm. 

" She is dead ! '* I answered curtly and with a chill 
smile. 

He gave a slight disdainful gesture, still keeping his 
eyes upon me. 

" I do not believe you," he said. " She could not die, 
— not yet ; she is too young, — too beautiful ! Wou^d 
she were dead ! — but I know she is not." 

" You know she is not ! " I retorted. " How do you 
know ? I tell you she is dead ! — dead to every one that 
honored or loved her ! What ! — has she not sought you 
out before this ? — she has had ample time." 

His face grew very white — his look expressed sudden 
fear and bewilderment. 

" Sought 7ne out ! " he stammered hurriedly. " What 
do you mean ? Is she not your wife ? — have you not 
married her ? " 

My hands clenched themselves involuntarily till the 
nails dug into my flesh. 

" Lache ! ^^ I cried furiously. '"'^ Dare you suppose 
that I would wed your cast-off mistress ? " 

With a sudden supple movement he turned upon me, 
and seizing me by both shoulders held me as in a vice. 

" Do not say that, Gaston Beauvais ! " he muttered 



204 WORMWOOD, 

fiercely, his rich voice trembling with passion. " Do not 
fling one word of opprobrium at the child whose very in- 
nocence was her ruin ! Here, as we two stand face to 
face alone with the night and God as witnesses, do we 
not knov/ the truth, you and I, as men, that it is we who 
take dastardly advantage of the passionate impulse of a 
young girl's tenderness, and that often her very sin of 
love looks white virtue compared to our black vice ! I 
— I alone am to blame for my darling's misery ; — you 
have not married her, you say, — then where is she ? As 
mine was the fault, so shall mine be the reparation, — God 
knows the bitterness now of my remorse ! But do not 
you presume to judge her, Gaston Beauvais ! — you are no 
more than man, and as such, the condemnation of a woman 
ill becomes you ! " 

He loosened his grasp of me so swiftly that I reeled 
slightly back from him, — the old magnetic charm of his 
voice restrained my rage for an instant, and I gazed at 
him half stupefied. The wonderful spiritual beauty of his 
face was intensified by the moon's mellow luster ; his 
proud, almost defiant attitude would have suggested to 
any ordinary observer that it was he who was the offend- 
ed, and I the offender ! Had we been playing our life- 
parts on the theatrical stage, the sympathy of the audi- 
ence would have assuredly gone with him and away from 
me, all because he looked handsome, and spoke fear- 
lessly ! Such is the world's villainous inconsistency ! 
He waited, as though to rally his forces ; — I waited too, 
considering how best I could pierce that saintly exterior 
down to the satyr heart within ! A curious nervous trem- 
bling seized me ; my pulses began to gallop and the blood 
hummed tumultuously in my ears, but nevertheless I 
managed still to keep up the outward appearance of per- 
fect composure. 

" Where is she ? " he again demanded. 

" On the streets of Paris ! " I answered sneeringly. 

" My God ! " and be sprang towards me. " Her 
father " 

" Is dead and buried ! What next ? Ask ! — I shall 
not scruple to tell you the result of your work, Silvion 
Guid'el ! It is well that when you perform mass, you 
should know for whom to pray ! " 

And I laughed bitterly. His head drocped on his 



WORMWOOD. 



205 



breast, — his features grew wan and rigid, and a deep sigh 
shuddered through his frame. 

" Pauline ! Pauline ! " I heard him mutter under his 
breath. " Poor little child ! — what can I do for thee ? " 

At this, the venomous passion of my soul seemed to 
urge itself into full-voiced utterance. 

*' What can you do .'' " I exclaimed. " Nothing ! You 
are too late ! You talk of reparation, — what reparation 
is possible, no7v ? You had it in your power to make 
amends, — you could at least have married the girl whose 
mind you contaminated and whose life you wronged ! 
But no ! — you slunk into the refuge of the priesthood like 
a beaten cur ! — you proved yourself a betrayer, deserter, 
and coward ! — and like a sanctimonious fool and hypo- 
crite as you were trusted to my generosity to cover your 
crime ! As well trust a tiger not to tear ! What ! Did 
you take me for a church saint .-* Have I ever played that 
part "i — have I ever pretended to be more than man ? I 
told you once that I would never forgive even the closest 
friend who dared to deceive me, — do you think my words 
were mere feigning ? Listen ! Pauline de Charmilles 
confessed her shame to me in secret, — / proclaimed it in 
public ! I do not love dishonor, — I set no value on 
flawed jewels ! I rejected her ! — mark you that, Silvion 
Guid^l, holy servant of the church as )^ou are ! — I rejected 
her on the very day appointed for our marriage, in pres- 
ence of all those fine birds of fashion that came to see us 
wedded ! — ah, it was a rare vengeance, and sweeter to me 
than any fortune or fame ! What now .'' Is there some- 
thing unusual in my aspect to so arouse your pious won- 
der 1 You stare at me as if you saw a dead man moulder- 
ing in his grave ! " 

His eyes flashed forth a fierce and unutterable scorn. 

" I see worse than that 1 " he answered passionately. 
" I see — oh God ! — I see what I never imagined I should 
see ! — a baser villain than myself ! " 

He paused, his breath coming and going rapidly, — 
then, with a wild gesture he cried out as though suddenly 
oblivious of my presence — 

" Oh Pauline, Pauline ! My little love ! — my angel ! 
Lost, ruined, and deserted ! — oh Pauline ! — Pauline ! " 

The yearning tenderness in his voice set astir a strange 
new throbbing in my blood, and drawing a stealthy step 



2o6 WORMWOOD. 

or two nearer I studied his agonized face as I would have 
studied some rare or curious picture. He glanced at me 
where I stood, and a strange smile curved his lips. 

'• Why do you not kill me ? *' he said with an inviting 
gesture. ** I should be glad to die ! * 

I made no immediate answer. Why dU I not kill him J 
It was a foolish question, and it hummed in my ears with 
foolish persistency. To escape from it I forced myself 
into a side-issue of the argument. 

" WTiy did you become a priest ? " I asked. 

He sighed. 

" Because I was compelled,'' he answered wearily. " Of 
course you will not believe me. But you do no: under- 
stands—and it would take too long to explain. I could 
not help myself : circumstance is often stronger than wilL 
I strove against it. — all in vain ! — you are right enough 
when you speak of church tyranny. The Church is a 
tvrant, — none crueller, more absolute or more lacking in 
Christian charity — its velvet glove covers a merciless 
hand of iron. Once made a priest, I was sent on to 
Rome : and there, under pretence of special favor and 
protection I was kept in close attendance on cardinals and 
monsignori ; — I prayed for news from home. — none ever 
reached me. — till tired of waiting, I came away by stealth 
and traveled straight to Paris ;^-I only arrived to-day." 

•• And why are you here I " I demanded, indicating by a 
gesture the surrounding woodland and rippling water. 

*• Why ? " — ^he sighed again, and looked upward to the 
peaceful sky above him — •' Because here the heavens 
smiled upon the only happiness I ever knew ! Love, the 
natural claim and heritage of man, this was bestowed upon 
me here ; — here I won the tender binhright of my blood, 
— a birthright which priestly usage would have defrauded 
me of 1 I came here too, because I dared not go else- 
where ; — for though I was ignorant of all you have told 
me, I avoided my uncle's house — I know not why — save 
that I felt I could not bear to enter it, — now! " 
I remained silent, watching him. 

*' Here was our secret tr}sting-place ! " he went on 
dreamily. " Here under these trees, beloved for her sake, 
Pauline has wandered with me, her sweet eyes speaking 
what her lips were afraid to utter — her little hand in mine 
— her head resting on my heart ! Here we two have 



WOJ^AflVOOD. a 07 

tasted the divinest joy that life can ever give, or death 
take away, — joy that yon have never known, Gaston 
Beauvais ! — no ! for my darling never loved you ! Your 
touch never wakened in her one responsive throb of pas- 
sion ; — she loved me, and me alone ! Ay ! — even if you 
had married her, and if my faults were ten thousand times 
greater than they are, she would still love me faithfully to 
the end ! " 

Here was specious " French " reasoning with a ven- 
geance ! I thought I must have gone mad with fury as I 
saw the expression of serene triumph on that pale poet- 
face, fair as an angel's in the radiance of the moon. 

" You boast of that ? " I said hoarsely. *' You dare to 
boast of that ? " 

He smiled victoriouslv. 

" Even so ! I boast of that ! It is something to be 
proud of, to have been loved truly, once ! " 

My hands clenched. 

" Will you seek her out .-* " I asked breathlessly. 

" I will ! " 

" When ? " 

" To-morrow ! " 

" To-night is not ended ! " I muttered, edging a little 
nearer to him still, and trying to keep my thoughts steady 
in the surging tumult of hissing and whispering noises 
that buzzed in my brain. '* And, — if you find her, — what 
then ? " 

" What then ? " — and with a reckless gesture of mingled 
defiance and passion, he lifted his eyes once more to the 
observant stars — " W'hy, then it may be that I shall con- 
demn my soul to hell for her sake ! I shall, if the Church 
is the Voice of God ! But, should it chance, as I have 
thought, — that God is something infinitely more supreme 
than any Church, — more great, more loving, more ten- 
derly wise and pitiful than can be imagined by His subject- 
creature Man, — I doubt not, if this be true, that when I 
rescue and comfort the woman I have wronged as only 
love can comfort her, — when I kneel at her feet and ask 
her pardon for the evil I have wrought, — even thus shall 
I make my surest peace with Heaven ! " 

Canting hypocrite ! — vile traducer ! — worse in my sighf 
than ever for his braggart pretence of piety ! Quick as h 
lightning flash the suppressed ferocity of my soul broke 



2o8 WORMWOOD,. 

forth, — and without warning or premeditation I threw 
myself savagely upon him. 

" Best make peace with it now ! " I cried. " For, by 
God ! it is your last chance ! " 

For one panting second we stared into each other's eyes, 
• — our faces almost touching, our very breaths commin- 
gling : then, yielding to the natural impulse of self-defence, 
he closed with me and fought strenuously for life. He 
was light, agile and muscular, and would have proved a 
powerful opponent to most men, — but his strength was as 
nothing to the superhuman force that possessed me — the 
force of twenty devils as it were, brought into opposition 
against this one struggling existence. Wild voices sang, 
shouted, and yelled in my ears " Kill ! Kill ! Kill him ! " 
circles of fire swam before me, — and once as he swerved 
back from my grasp and nearly fell, I laughed aloud, 
laughed, as I sprang at him anew, and shook him furiously 
to and fro as a wild beast shakes its prey. Closing with 
me again, he managed to seize my arms in such wise that 
for the moment I was rendered powerless ; and once 
more his great dark eyes flamed into mine. 

" Are you mad, Gaston Beauvais ? " he gasped. " Do 
you want to murder me ? " 

As he spoke, my rapid glance travelled upward to his 
neck which showed itself l3are and white just above the 
close-set priestly band of his black habit, — I saw where I 
, could win my fearful victory ! I made a pretence of fall- 
ing beneath his hold, — and involuntarily his grasp re- 
laxed; — in one breath of time I had wrenched myself 
free, — in another, my two hands were closed fast on that 
smooth, full tempting throat, gripping it hard as a vice of 
steel ! . . . Tighter ! — tighter ! — and the fair face above 
me grew dark and convulsed, — the flashing gray-black 
eyes started horribly from their sockets ! — tighter still ! — 
one desperate choking struggle more, and he fell prone 
on the sward, I falling upon him, so that the deadly clutch 
. of my fingers never relaxed for a second ! Once down, 
my murderous task was easier, — my wrists had more 
power, — and I pressed all my weight upon the swelled 
and throbbing arteries beneath my relentless hands. 
Those eyes ! — how they glared at me ! wide open and 
awfully protruding ! — would the cursed life in them never 
be quenched ? 



WOKMIVOOD. 209 

" Die ! — die ! " I muttered fiercely under my breath. 
** God ! — That it should take so long to kill a man ! " 

Suddenly a great shudder shook the limbs over which 
I crouched brute-like and watchful, — those pulsing veins 
beneath my fingers stopped, — the head fell further back, 
— the lips parted, showing a glimmer of pearly teeth 
within, in the ghastly semblance of a smile, — and then, — 
then came silence ! Silence ! — horror ! What now ? 
What did it all mean ? What was this cold awfulness — this 
dumb, rigid, staring thing ? — was this death ? Seized by 
a swift frenzied fear, I sprang up,- -I looked about me 
everywhere. Everywhere solitude ! — only the whisper- 
ing of trees and shining of stars ! Only Nature, and t/iat^ 
— that strange still figure on the grass with arms out- 
spread on either side like a Christ without the cross. 
What had I done ? I considered doubtfully ; looking 
vaguely at my own hands the while. No stain of blood 
was on them ! Had I then killed him ? No, — no ! — not 
possible ! He had swooned ! 

I stepped close up to him, — I took his hand, — it was 
warm. 

" Guidel ! " I said, — and the sound of my own voice 
startled my sense of hearing — " Come get up ! — do not 
lie there as if I had murdered you ! Get up, I tell you ! 
— Our quarrel is over, — we will fight no more ! " 

Silence ! The wide open eyes regarded me fixedly, — 
they were glazing over with a strange film ! A bird darted 
from one of the branches overhead, and flew rustlingly 
through the air, — the sound of its wings threw me into a 
cold perspiration, and I fell on my knees shuddering 
through and through. I crawled reluctantly up to that 
dark recumbent mass, ... if he were dead, ... if he were 
dead, I thought, quaking in every limb, — why then — I 
would shut those eyes ! My previous mad fury had given 
place to weak, half delirious terror ; — I could scarcely 
summon up the courage to reach out my hands and let 
them hover above those pallid features, that in all the con- 
torted agony of their last expression were already freez- 
ing under my very gaze into a marble-like rigidity ? I 
touched the eyelids, — I pressed them firmly down over the 
glassy balls beneath, ... so ! — they could look at me no 
longer 1 

With a sigh of relief I crawled away again, and once at 



210 IVORMWOOD. ^ 

.1 
arm's length from the corpse, stood upright wondering 
what next I should do. I had killed Silvion Guidel ; — 
this seemed evident ; — and yet I strove to represent to 
myself that it was not, could not be so. Some inherent 
weakness of the heart's action might have done the deed ; 
— it could not have been the mere grasp of my hands ! 
But, after all, — had I not meaiit to kill him ? Had not the 
idea slept in my brain for weeks without declaring itself ? 
— and had it not become actively paramount with me 
from. the moment I saw him that night.-* Yes ! — it was a 
murder — and a premeditated one if truth were told ! I 
had violently taken a man's life ! — I ! I looked awfully 
round at my victim, — and looking, shrieked aloud ! The 
eyes — the eyes that I had shut so fast, were ope7i^ — wide 
open and protruding more than ever ! How they stared at 
me ! — with what fixed and pertinacious solenmity ! In a 
delirium of haste I rushed back to the horrible figure 
lying prone, and pressed my fingers hard and heavily once 
more upon the cold yet rebellious lids. But in vain ! — 
they curled upwards again from under my very touch, and 
again left eyeballs glassy and bare ! I moaned and shivered 
while the sweat poured from my forehead in the ex- 
tremity of fear that possessed me ; — and then all at once 
a ghastly thought flashed across my brain. I had heard 
scientists say that the eyes of a murdered man took in 
their last look the portrait of his murderer, and that this 
so terribly painted miniature could be reproduced faith- 
fully, line for line ! Was such a thing possible ? . . . Oh 
why, why could I not shut those eyes ! I could stamp 
them out with my heel if I dared, — but, I did not 
dare ! 

Again I looked up at the stars, — then down at the river, 
whereof the tide, now risen higher, made a roaring rush 
of music, — and while I waited thus, the church clock, the 
same I had heard before, struck midnight. Only an hour 
had passed since I stood on the bridge, an evil-brooding 
man, but not — not a murderer ! Only an hour ! — it seemed 
an eternity, — and truly it had wrought an eternal change 
in my destiny. I had shed no blood, — and yet the air 
was red about me, — the very stars seemed to dart at me 
fiery tongues of flame, — but the worst thing of all was the 
horrible passiveness, the dreadful inertness of my strangled 
foe, — for oddly enough I knew though I had killed him, 



WORMIVOOD. 2 1 1 

at the same time I could not comprehend why he should 
be dead ! 

I had turned my back upon the corpse, but now I 
forced myself to confront it once more, — though I strove 
my utmost to avoid its terrible eyes. Silvion Guid^l's 
eyes they were, — imagine it ! — those strained, glazed an- 
guished, crystalline-looking things, — the eyes that had 
darkned with thought and lightened with love, — the eyes 
that had flashed their passionate prayer into the eyes of 
Pauline ! — ha ! what would s/ie say if she could see them 
now ? Pauline's lover ! — Pauline's seducer ! — the liber- 
tine, — the Priest ! — there he lay, the holy chosen servant 
of Mother Church, — dead/ Dead, and I had killed him ! 
Good ! For the millionth time or more, the world's Cain 
had proved himself stronger than God's favored Abel ! 
And yet, you say, some of you, that God is " omnipotent." 
Tell this to children if it please you, but spare me, an 
absi?itheiir^ from so unnecessary a Lie ! 

For a time my brain reeled under its pressure of sicken- 
ing thought ; but at last the idea came to me that I must 
somehow or other get rid of the body. I could not bury 
it ; — I could perhaps drag it or carry it to that shelving 
bank which jutted slopingly into the river at a little 
distance from where I stood, and from thence I could 
fling it into the Seine. And the Seine would wash it to 
and fro and disfigure it with mud and weedy slime, and 
carry it perchance down like a log, past cities, towns, and 
villages, to the sea, — the wide merciful, blank sea, where 
so many things are sunk and forgotten. Unless — unless 
it should be found and dragged ashore ! — but I could not 
suffer myself to think of this probability ; and stringing 
up every nerve and sinew to the labor, I began my task. 
I lifted the corpse from the ground, always appalled by the 
never-closing eyes, and by dint of the strongest effort, 
managed to support its chill and awful weight across my 
shoulder, while I staggered to the river's brink. There 
stopping and panting for breath, I laid it down, struck 
once more by the tremulous sense that life after all might 
still be fluttering within this stiffening mass of clay. 
Keeping my courage firm, I bent down and felt the heart ; 
— it was stone-still ; but some small thing like a packet 
lay pressed above it. An Agnus Dei? Oh no! — priests 
do not always wear purely sacred symbols ! I took it out, 



212 WORMWOOD. 

— it was a folded paper which I opened, and found inside a 
thick curl of soft dark hair. Pauline's hair ! — I knew it 
well ! — the touch of it, the delicate scent of it, made me 
tremble as with an ague-fit — and I hastily thrust it into my 
own breast. Then I stared again down at my work, — and 
smiled ! There was no beauty in this lifeless lump before 
me, — death by strangulation had so blackened and distort- 
ed the features that their classic regularity and fairness 
was no longer perceivable, — the very parting of the lips, 
which had at first seemed like a faint serene smile, had 
now stiffened into a hideous grin. Death is not always 
beautiful, mes amis ! The pretty sentimentalists may im- 
gine it so if they choose, but it is far more often repulsive 
in its effects than admirable, believe me ! And if it 
chance that you are doomed to die by the close pull of the 
hangman's cord about your throat, or the grip of a mad- 
man's fingers close on your windpipe, you may be sure 
your countenance will not be a model for sculptors after- 
wards ! 

Now, as I stood regarding my victim steadfastly, a 
certain grim pleasure began to stir throbbingly in my 
veins. I — I, alone and unassisted had destroyed all that 
subtle mechanism of manhood called God's handiwork ; 
I had defaced all that comeliness on which Nature seemed 
to have set her fairest seal ! Why should I have been 
so terrified at those open eyes, I thought, self-scorningly ? 
— they were dead things and lustreless ; — their reproachful 
expression was mere seeming ! Quick ! — into the quiet 
waters with such useless carrion ! — let it first sink like a 
stone and then float, a disfigured blubber mass, on the 
destroymg tide ! For water, like earth, breeds hungry 
corpse-devouring creatures, who will make short work of 
even such sacred goods as a priest's dead body ! — besides, 
— there is no blood — no sign of violence anywhere, — no 
proof of — of — murder! Stay, though ! — there are marks 
on the throat, — the marks of my throttling fingers — 
but what of that .'* Surely the river's quiet working will 
efface these in an hour ? 

Raising myself stiffly erect, I peered round about me 
on all sides, and scanned the opposite bank of the 
Seine scrutinizingly, lest haply some lonely musing soul 
should be walking there and watching the water ripple 
caressingly beneath the moon, — but there was no one visi- 



IVOJ^MIVOOD 213 

ble. I might have been alone in a desert, so profoundly 
still and solitary was the night ; — all nature seemed 
gravely occupied in watching mCy or so I fancied ; the 
heavens leaned towards nie with all their whirling stars, 
as though I had drawn them down to stare wonderingly 
at my slain man ! Once more 1 lifted the body ; — this 
time the head fell back over my arm with sickening 
suddenness, and a light wind fanned the clustering hair 
backwards from the brow. Looking, — for some resistless 
instinctive force compelled me to look, — I saw a slight 
but deep scar running just across the left temple, — 
whereupon a new fear assailed me. If found, would the 
corpse be recognized by that scar ? — was there anything 
else that might give a clue to its identity, and so start 
long and circumstantial inquiries and researches which 
in the end might track me out as the murderer ? I laid 
my horrid burden down again, and hastily ransacked the 
pockets of the priestly garments, — there was not a letter 
or paper by which anything could be traced, — only a 
return ticket to Rome, which I tore up, — an old breviary 
and a purse containing about four hundred francs. 
There was no name in the breviary, and I put it back 
together with the purse, in the place where I had found 
it. In leaving the money thus untouched, I calculated 
that if discovered at all, the body would probably be 
taken for that of a suicide, — as a murdered man is 
generally, especially in France, deprived of valuables. 
That sort of suspicion, — that idea of murder — how the 
word chilled me ! — would in this case be averted ; — for I 
attached no importance to the circumstance of the 
priest's garb. Priests are as apt to kill themselves as 
other people, are they not ? They have more reason, I 
should say, — knowing themselves to be such false 
pretenders ! 

Satisfied with my examination, — though I could not do 
away with that scar on the temples, — I raised the rigid 
weight, now grown heavier, once more, — the arms hung 
downwards, stiff and inert, — one of the hands swinging 
round as I moved, touched me, and I nearly shrieked 
aloud, it was so clammy cold ! I reached the edge of 
the shelving bank, and then, staggering slowly, inch, by 
inch along the natural pier of stones that ran out into the 
river, I flung the corpse from me, far forward, with all 



it 4 WORMWOOD. 

my might ! It fell crashingly through the water, the 
sonorous echo of its fall resounding on both banks of 
the stream to such an extent that it seemed to me as 
if all the world must instantly awaken from sleep and 
rush upon me in crowds to demand a knowledge of my 
crime ! I waited — my heart almost standing still with 
sheer terror, — waited till the close circles in the water 
widened and widened and melted in smooth width away. 
No sound followed, — no cry of " Murder ! " startled the 
night, — all was quiet as before, — all as watchfully ob- 
servant of me as if each separate leaf on the branches of 
the trees had eyes ! 

I hurried back to the spot where the struggle had taken 
place, and there with eager hands and feet, I scraped and 
smoothed the torn and trampled earth, and walked and 
re-walked upon it till it looked neatly flat as a board in 
the clear light of the moon ; aye — I even overcame my 
shuddering reluctance so far that I coaxed and pulled and 
brushed up the crushed grass on which Silvion Guidel had 
fallen down to die ! 

So ! — all was done ! — and, pausing, I surveyed the scene. 
Oh scene of perfect peace ! — Oh quiet nook for love in- 
deed ! — such love as brought Pauline here in the dewy 
hush of early mornings when instead of praying at mass 
as she so prettily feigned, she listened to a pleading more 
passionate than the cold white angels know ! For love 
— the love we crave and thirst for, — is not methinks of 
holy origin ! — it was germinated in hell, — born of fire, 
tears, and restless breathing ; — the bright chill realms of 
heaven hold no such burning flame ! I cursed the fair- 
ness of the place, and Nature mocked my curses with her 
smile ! The tranquil moon gazed downwards pensively, 
thinking her own thoughts doubtless as she swept through 
the sky — the trees quivered softly in their dreams, touched 
perchance by some tender rush of memory ; and the river 
lapped whisperingly against the shore as though deliver- 
ing kisses from the blossoms on one side to the blossoms 
on the other. The sleepy enchantment of the mingling 
midnight and morning seemed to hang like an opaline 
mist in the air, — and as I looked, I suddenly felt that I, 
standing where I did, had all at once become a mere out- 
cast and alien from the beautiful confidence of Nature, — 
that the dead body I had just thrown in the murmuring 



IVORAfWOOD 



215 



waters was far more gathered into the heart of things 
than 1 ! 

Slowly and with an inexplicable reluctance I crept away, 
— slinking through the trees like a terrified beast that 
shuns some fierce pursuer; afraid of both moonbeams and 
shadows, and still more afraid of the deep calm about me 
— a calm that could almost be felt. 1 stole out of the 
Bois, and set foot on the Suresnes bridge — a loose plank 
creaked beneath my tread, and the sound sent the blood 
up to my brow in a hot rush of pain, — and then — then 
some impulse made me pause. Some deadly fascination 
seized me to lean my arms upon the bridge-parapet and 
look over, and down, into the river below. The water 
heaved under me in a silvery white glitter, — and while I 
yet gazed downwards, — a dark mass drifted into view — 
a heavy floating blackness, out of which two glistening 
awful eyes stared at me and at the moon ! . . . clutching 
at the edge of the parapet, I hung over it, with beating 
heart and straining sight — anon, I broke into a fit of de- 
lirious laughter ! 

" Silvion ! " I whispered. " Silvion Guidel ! What ! 
— are you there again .? Not at rest yet ? Sleep, man ! 
sleep ! Be satisfied with God now you have found Him ! 
— Good-night, Guidel ; good-night ! " 

Here my laughter suddenly spent itself in a fierce sob- 
bing groan, — I shrank back from the parapet trembling 
in every limb, — and like a sick man waking out of a 
morphia-sleep I suddenly realized that the tide seemed 
flowing towards Paris, — not down to the sea ! Well ! — 
what then ? 

I dared not stop to think ! With a savage cry I covered 
my face and fled, — fled in furious panting haste and fear, 
rushing along the silent road to the city with the reckless 
speed of an escaped madman, and followed as it seemed 
by the sound of a whispered '' Murder I Afurder /" hissed 
after me by the vindictive, upward-turning Seine, that 
pursued me closely as I ran, bearing with it its awful wit- 
ness to the black deed I had done 1 



2i6i PVORMWOOD. 



XXIII. 

For the next three or four days I lived in a sort of 
feverish delirium, hovering betwixt hope and terror, satis- 
faction and despair. But by degrees I began to make 
scorn of my own cowardice, — for though I searched all 
the newspapers with avidity I never saw the one thing I 
dreaded, — namely an account of the discovery of a priest's 
body in the Seine, and a suggestion as to his having come 
to his death by foul means. Another murder had been 
committed in Paris just the day after I had killed Silvion 
Guidbl, — and it was a particularly brillant one — quite 
dramatic in fact. The mistress of a famous opera-tenor 
had been found in her bed with her throat cut, and the 
tenor, — a ladies' favorite, — had been arrested for the 
crime in spite of his gracefully stagey protestations of 
sorrow and innocence. This event was the talk of Paris, 
— so that one corpse more or less found floating in the 
river would at such a time of superior excitement, awaken 
very little if any interest. For though the natural stu- 
pidity of the unofficial man is great, that of the strictly 
official personage is even greater. I allude to the chiefs 
of the police. They are a very excellent class of block- 
heads and their intentions are no doubt admirably just 
and severe, — but they have too much routine, — too many 
little absurd minutise of rule and etiquette out of which 
they can seldom be persuaded to move. It follows there- 
fore that the perpetrators of crime having 710 specially 
designed routine, and being generally totally lacking in 
etiquette, very often get the best of it, and that nine out 
of every ten murders remain undiscovered. It was so in 
my case ; — it is so, you may be sure, in many another. 
Mere formal rule must be done away with in the task of 
discovering a murderer, — there must be less writing of 
documents, and tying of tape, and docketing of accounts, 
and more instant and decisive action. When, for example, 
a policeman on duty finds the body of a murdered and 
mutilated woman in a pool of blood on a doorstep, and 
after much cogitation and reflection, decides that blood- 



WORMWOOD. 217 

hounds might be useful in tracking the murderer, he 
would do well to got those bloodhounds at once, and not 
wait till the next day when the scent will be more than 
difficult to pursue. But / have no wish to complain of 
the respectable muddlers who sit in their offices carefully 
writing descriptive reports and compiling evidence, while 
the criminal they are in search of probably passes under 
their very windows with a triumphant grin and scornful 
snap of his gory fingers, — not at all ! On the contrary, I 
am very much obliged to them for never taking any 
trouble about me, and allowing me to roam through Paris 
at perfect liberty. For at the time I strangled my priestly 
victim, I had no wish to be even known as a murderer. 
" Extenuating circumstances " would no doubt have been 
found sufficiently strong to save me from the guillotine, — 
but I really should not have cared particularly for the 
renown thus attained ! Yes, renow?i ! — why not ? A 
notorious Paris murderer gains more renown in a day 
than a great genius in ten years ! There is a difference 
in the quality of renown, you say ? I fail to see it ! 
There is a difference, if you like, in the character of the 
person renowned, — but the renown itself — the dirty hand- 
clapping of the many-tongued mob, — is almost the same. 
Because, they, the mob, never praise a great man without 
at the same time calumniating him for some trifling fault 
of character, — likewise, they never cast their opprobrium 
at a criminal without discovering in him some faint speck 
of virtue of which they frequently make such a hullabaloo, 
that it sometimes looks as if they thought him a martyred 
saint after all ! " Not this man, but Barabbas ! " is 
shouted all over the world to this day, — the crucifixion of 
great natures and the setting free of known robbers is 
the common and incessant custom of the crowd. We are 
told by the teachers of the present age, that Christianity 
is a myth, — its Founder a legendary personage, — but by 
all the creeds of this world and the next, the story remains 
and 1 fancy will continue to remain, a curiously true and 
significant symbol of Humanity ! 

I suppose nearly a week must have passed since I had 
sent Silvion Guidel to his account with that Deity he pro- 
fessed to serve, when one day, straying down a back- 
street which was a short cut to the obscure hotel I in- 
habited, I saw Pauline ! It was dusk, and she was hurry* 



2iS tVORMWOOl^. 

ing along rapidly ; but for one instant I caught sight of 
the young childish face, the soft blue eyes, the dark curl- 
ing clusters of hair. She did not perceive me, and I fol- 
lowed her at a distance, wondering whither she was 
bound and how she lived. She was miserably clad, — her 
figure looked thin and shadowy ! — but she walked with a 
light swift step, — a step which to my idea seem.ed to 
imply that some interest or hope or ambition still kept 
her capable of living on, though lonely and abandoned 
in the wild and wicked world of Paris. Suddenly at a cor- 
ner she turned and disappeared, — and though I pursued 
her almost at a run I could not discover in what direction 
she had gone. Provoked at my own stupidity, I rambled 
aimlessly up and down the place I found myself in, which 
was a mere slum, and was on the point of asking some 
questions at one of the filthy-looking hovels close by, when 
a hand grasped me from behind, a loud laugh broke on 
my ears, and I turned to confront Andre Gessonex. 

" Have you come to pay me a visit, mon cher ? " he 
asked, with a half mock, half ceremonious salutation. 
" By my faith, you do me an inestimable honor ! I live 
here" — and he pointed to a miserable tenement house, 
the roof of which was half off and the three upper win- 
dows broken. " Behold ! — ' Apparte7ne7its Meubles ! ' " 
And true enough, this grandiose announcement was dis- 
tinctly to be read on a wooden placard dangling from one 
of the aforesaid broken windows. *' I have the best 
floor," he continued, " the ' salon ' let us call it ! — the 
other apartments I have not examined, but I should 
imagine they must be airy ! No doubt they also com- 
mand an open view from the roof, which would probably 
be an attraction. But enter, cher Beauvais ! — enter ! — I 
am delighted to welcome you ! — the best I have of every- 
thing is at your service ! " 

And with the oddest gestures of fantastic courtesy, he 
invited me to follow him. 

I hesitated a moment, — he looked so wild about the 
eyes, so gaunt and ghastly, that for the moment I won- 
dered whether I was not perhaps entrusting myself to the 
tender mercies of a madman. Then I quickly remem- 
bered my own condition, — what if he 7vere mad, I thought, 
his madness had not led him to commit Murder, — not 
yet ! I had a certain dull curiosity to see what sort of a 



WORAfWOOD. 219 

place he dwelt in, — I therefore complied with his request, 
and stumbled after him up a crooked flight of stairs, 
nearly falling over a small child on the way, — a towzled 
half-naked creature who sat crouched in one of the darkest 
corners, biting a crust of bread and snarling over it in 
very much the fashion of an angry tiger-cat. Gessonex, 
hearing my smothered exclamation, turned round, spied 
this object and laughed delightedly. 

" Ah voila ! " he cried. " That is one of my models of 
the Stone Period ! If you have kicked that charming boy 
by accident, Beauvais, do not trouble to ask his pardon ! 
He will not appreciate the courtesy ! Two sentiments 
alone inspire him — fear and ferocity ! " And seizing the 
mass of hair and rags by its neck, he shook it to and fro 
violently, exclaiming, " Viens id, bete! Montres tes dents 
et tes ofigles ! Viens ! " 

The creature uttered some unintelligible sound, and 
got on its feet, still biting the crust and snarling, — and 
presently we all three stood in a low wide room, littered 
about with painter's materials and various sorts of taW' 
dry rubbish, where the first thing that riveted the eye was 
an enormous canvas stretched across the wall, on which 
the body of a nude Venus was displayed in all its rotun- 
dity, — the head, not yet being painted in was left to the 
imagination of the spectator. Gessonex, still grasping 
the bundle he called his "^^/<f," threw himself down in a 
chair, after signing to me to take whatever seat I found 
convenient, — and, with the handle of a long paint-brush, 
began by degrees to lift the matted locks of hair from off 
the face of the mysterious object he held, who bit and 
growled on continuously, regardless of his patron's atten- 
tions. Presently, a countenance became visible — the 
countenance of a mingled monkey and savage, — brutish, 
repulsive, terrible in all respects save for the eyes, which 
were magnificent, — jewel-like, clear and cruel as the eyes 
of a wolf or a snake. 

" There ! " said Gessonex triumphantly, turning the 
strange physiognomy round towards me, — " There's a boy 
for you ! He would do credit to the antediluvian age, 
when Man was still in process of formation. The chin, 
you see, is not developed, — the forehead recedes like that 
of the baboon ancestor, — the nose has not yet received 
its intellectual prominence, — but the eyes are perfectly 



220 WORMWOOD. 

formed. Now about these eyes, — you have in them the 
most complete disprovers of the poetical sentiment about 
* eyes being the windows of the soul,' because this child 
has simply ?io soul. He is an animal, made merely, if we 
quote Scripture, to ' arise, kill and eat.' He has no idea 
of anything else, — his thoughts are as the thoughts of 
beasts, and the only sentences of intelligible speech he 
knows are my teaching. Hear him ! — he will give you an 
excellent homily on the duty of life. Now tell me, mon 
singe,''^ he went on, addressing the boy, and artistically 
lifting up another of his matted curls with the paint-brush 
handle, — " What is life ! It is a mystery to us / Will 
you explain it ? " 

The savage little creature glared from one to the other 
of us in sullen curiosity and fear, — his breath came 
quickly and he clenched his small grimy hands. He was 
evidently trying to remember something and found the 
effort exhausting. Presently between his set teeth came 
the words — 

''J'aifaim.r' 

" Bravo ! " said Gessonex approvingly, still arranging 
the hair of his protege. " Very well said ! You see, 
Beauvais, he understands life thoroughly, this child ! ^Jai 
/aim /' All is said ! It is the universal cry of existence 
— hunger ! And the remarkable part of the whole affair 
is that the complaint is incessant ; even Monsieur Gros- 
Jea7i, conscious of the well-rounded paunch he has ac- 
quired, through over-feeding, has never had enough, and 
at morning, noon, and evening, propounds the hunger 
problem afresh, and curses his chef for not providing 
more novelties in the cuisine. Humanity is never satis- 
fied, — it ransacks earth, air, ocean, — it gathers together 
gold, jewels, palaces, ships, wine — and woman, — and 
then, when all is gotten that can be gained out of the la- 
boring universe, it turns its savage face towards Heaven 
and apostrophizes Deity with a defiance. ' This world is 
not enough for my needs ! ' it cries. ' I will put Orion 
in my pocket and wear the Pleiades in my buttonhole ! 
— I will have Eternity for my heritage and Thyself for my 
comrade ! — -faifaim / ' " 

He laughed v/ildly, and opening a drawer near him, 
took out a small apple and threw it playfully aloft. 

" Catch ! " he cried, and the boy, tossing up his head 



Wormwood. 221 

caught it between his teeth with extraordinary precision 
as it fell. " Well done ! Now let us see you munch as 
Adam munched before you — ah ! what a juicy flavor ! — 
if it were only a stolen morsel, it would be ever so 
much sweeter ! Sit there ! " — and he pointed to an old 
bench in the opposite corner, whereon the strange child 
squatted obediently enough, his wonderful eyes sparkling 
with avidity as he plunged his sharp teeth in the fruit 
which was to him an evident rare delicacy. " He is the 
most admirable rat-hunter in Paris, I should say," went 
on Gessonex, eyeing him encouragingly. " Sharp as a 
ferret and agile as a cat! — he kills the vermin by scores, 
and what is very human, eats them with infinite relish 
afterwards ! " 

I shuddered. 

" Horrible ! " I exclaimed involuntarily. " Does he 
starve, then 1 " 

Gessonex regarded me with a rather pathetic smile. 

" My friend, we all starve here," he answered placidly. 
" It is the fashion of this particular qiiartier. Some of 
us, — myself for instance, — consider food a vulgar super- 
fluity ; and we take a certain honest pride in occasionally 
being able to able to dispense with it altogether. It is 
more a la mode in this neighborhood, which, however, is 
quite aristocratic compared to some others close by ! All 
the same I am really rather curious to know what has 
brought j'^// here, mon cher ! May I, without rudeness, ask 
the question ? " 

" I saw a woman I thought I knew," I answered eva- 
sively. " And I followed her." 

" Ah !— And the result t " 

" No result at all. I lost sight of her suddenly, and do 
not know how or where she disappeared." 

" Ah ! " said Gessonex again meditatively. " Women 
are very plentiful in these parts, — that is, a certain sort 
of women, — the flotsam and jetsam of the demi-mo?ide. 
From warm palaces, and carriages drawn by high-fed 
prancing horses they come to this, — and then, — to that ! " 

He pointed through the window and my eyes followed 
his gesture, — a glittering strip of water was just pallidly 
visible in the deepening twilight, — a curving gleam of the 
Seine. A faint tremor shook me, and to change the sub- 
ject, I reverted once more to the " brute " child, who had 



2 22 ffrORMWOOD. 

now finished his apple and sat glowering at us like a 
young owl from under his tangled bush of hair. 

" What is he ? " I asked abruptly. 

" My dear Beauvais, I thought I had explained ! " 
said Gessonex affably. " He is a type of the Age of 
Stone ! But if you want a more explicit definition, I 
will be strictly accurate and call him a production of 
Absinthe ! " 

I started, — then controlled myself as I saw that 
Gessonex regarded me intently. I forced a smile. 

" A production of Absinthe .'' " I echoed incredulously. 

" Precisely. Of Absinthe and Mania together. That 
is why I find him so intensely interesting. I know his 
pedigree, just as one knows the pedigree of a valuable 
dog or remarkable horse, — and it is full of significance. 
His grandfather was a man of science." 

I burst out laughing at the incongruity of this state- 
ment, whereupon Gessonex shook his head at me in 
mock-solemn reproach. 

" Never laugh, mo?t ami, at a joke you do not entirely 
understand. You cannot understand, and you never will 
understand the awful witticisms of Mother Nature, — and 
it is a phase of her enormous jesting that I am about to 
relate to you. I repeat, — this boy's grandfather was a 
man of science ; — with a pair of spectacles fixed on his 
nose and a score or so of reference volumes at hand, he 
set about prying into the innermost recesses of creation. 
Through his lunettes he peered dubiously at the Shadow- 
Brightness called God, and declared Him to be non est. 
He weighed Man's heart and mind in his small brazen 
scales, and fossilized both by his freezing analysis. He 
talked of Matter and of Force, — of Evolution and of 
Atoms. Love went on, Faith went on, Grief went on, 
Death went on, — he had little or nothing to do with any 
of these, — his main object was to prove away the flesh 
and blood of Life, and leave it a mere bleached skeleton. 
He succeeded admirably, — and at the age of sixty, found 
himself alofie with that skeleto?i f He dined with it, 
supped with it, slept with it. It confronted him at all 
hours and seasons, rattling its bones, and terrifying him 
with its empty eye-sockets and dangling jaws. At last, — 
one stormy night, — its hand roused him from sleep, and 
showed him the exact spot where his razor lay. He took 



WORMWOOD. 223 

the hint immediately, — made the lonp; artistic slit across 
his Ihroat which the skeleton so urgently recommended, 
■ — and died — or, to put it more delicately, departed to 
that mysterious region where hnidtes are not worn, and 
knowledge is imparted without the aid of printer's 
ink. He was a very interesting individual, — great when 
he was alive, according to the savaiits^ — forgotten in the 
usual wav, now he is dead." 

He paused, and 1 looked at him inquiringly. 

''Well.?" 

" Well ! He left one son, a charmingly dissolute indi- 
vidual, whose sole delight in life was to drink and dance the 
hours away. A remarkable contrast to his father, as you 
may imagine ! — and herein Dame Nature began her little 
pyschological game of cross-purposes. This fellow, born 
in Paris and a worshipper of all things Parisian, took to 
Absinthe in very early manhood, — not that I blame him 
for that in the least, — because it is really a fascinating 
hobby ! — and afterwards, through some extraordinary 
freak of the gods, became an actor. Night after night, he 
painted his face, padded his legs, and strutted the boards, 
feigning the various common phases of love and villainy 
in that lowest of all professions, the ape-like art of Mim- 
icry. He, unlike his reverend parent, never troubled him- 
self concerning the deeper questions of life at all ; Chaos 
was his faith, and Nonentity his principle ! His stage-ap- 
pearance, particularly his leg-padding, captivated a dancer, 
who went by the sobriquet of ' Fatima ' ; — she passed for 
an Odalisque, but was really the daughter of a Paris 
washerwoman, — and he was likewise smitten by her abun- 
dant charms, — wild eyes, flowing hair and shapely limbs, — 
and after a bit the two made up their minds to live together. 
Marriage of course was not considered a necessity to 
people of their reputable standing, — it seldom is, in these 
cases ! Love, however, or the passion they called by that 
name, proved much too weak and inadequate a rival to 
cope with Absinthe, — the ' green fairy ' had taken a firm 
hold of our friend the actor's mind, — and whether his 
amour had turned his head, or whether the emerald elixir 
had played him an ill turn I cannot tell you, but for some 
months after he had taken up his residence with the charm- 
ing ' Fatima ' he was the victim of a singular and exceed- 
ingly troublesome frenzy. This was neither more nor less 



224 ^ WORMWOOD. 

than the idea that his * ch}re aniie ' was a scaly serpent whose 
basilisk eyes attracted him in spite of his will, and whose 
sinuous embraces suffocated him and drove him mad. 
His behavior under these curious mental circumstances 
was excessively irritating, — and finally, after enduring his 
preposterous eccentricities till her patience (of which she 
had a very slight stock) was entirely exhausted, la belle 
Fatima bundled him off to a lunatic asylum, where, finding 
no sharp instrument convenient to his hand as his father 
had done before him, he throttled himself with his own 
desperate fingers. Imagine it ! — such a determined 
method of strangulation must have been a most unpleasant 
exit ! " 

A tremor ran through me as he spoke, and I averted my 
gaze from his. 

" It was a most unfortunate affair altogether," con- 
tinued Gessonex reflectively — '' and I'm afraid it must be 
set down chiefly to the fault of Absinthe, which though a 
most delightful and admirable slave, is an exceedingly bad 
master ! Yes ! " and he mused over this a little to him- 
self — " an exceedingly bad master ! If people would only 
imitate my example, and take all its pleasures without its 
tyranny, how much wiser and better that would be ! " 

I forced myself to speak, — to smile. 

" The ^passion verte ' never subdues you, then ? You 
subdue it ? " 

Our eyes met. A yellowish-red flush crept through the 
sickly pallor of his skin, but he laughed and gave a care- 
less gesture of indifference. 

" Of course ! Fancy a man being mastered and con- 
trolled by a mere liqueur ! The idea is sublimely ridic- 
ulous ! To complete my story ; — this boy here, — this ex- 
ponent of the Stone Age, — is the child of the absintheur 
and his * serpent,' — begotten of mania and born of apathy, 
the result is sufficiently remarkable ! I knew the parents, 
also, the savant grandpapa, — and I have always taken a 
scientific interest in this their only descendant. I think I 
know now how we can physiologically resolve ourselves 
back to the primary Brute-period, if we choose, — by living 
entirely on Absinthe ! " 

" But are you not a lover of Absinthe } " I queried half 
playfully. " A positive epicure in the flavor of the green 
nectar? — Why then, do you judge so ill of its effects?" 



WORAflVOOD. 



225 



He looked at me in the most naive wonderment. 

" My friend, 1 do not judge ill of its effects ! — there you 
quite mistake me ! I say it will help us to recover our 
brute-natures, — and that is precisely what I most desire ! 
Civilization is a curse, — Morality an enormous hindrance 
to freedom. Man was born a savage, and he is still hap- 
piest in a state of savagery. He has been civilized over 
and over again, believe me, through immovable cycles of 
time, — but the savage cannot be gotten out of him, and if 
allowed to do so, he returns to his pristine condition of 
lawless liberty with the most astonishing ease ! Civilized, 
we are shackled and bound in a thousand ways when we 
wash to give the rein to our natural impulses; we should 
be much more contented in our original state of brutish- 
ness and nudity. And contentment is what we want, — 
and what in our present modes of constrained culture we 
never get. For example, /am not half as civilized as the 
slain unit once known as Me, whom I buried, — I told you 
about that remarkable funeral, did I not ? — and as a 
natural consequence I am much happier ! The IMe who 
died was a painfully conscious creature, always striving 
to do good, — to attain the impossible perfection, — to teach, 
and love, to help and comfort his fellow-men ; — now, there 
was a frightful absurdity ! Yes ! that Me was an utter 
fool 1 — he painted angels, poetic ideals and visions of 
ethereal ecstasy — and all the art critics dubbed him 
an ass for his pains ! And, apropos of art, — as you are; 
here, Beauvais, I want you to see my last work — it's not 
a bit of use now, — but it may be worth something a 
hundred years hence." 

" Is that it ? " I inquired, with a movement of my hand 
towards the headless undraped Venus. 

" That ! — oh no ! That is a mere study of flesh-tints 
h la Rubens. This is what I call my ' chef-d'oeuvre ! ' " 

And springing up from his chair excitedly, he went 
towards the further end of the room, where the entire wall 
was covered with a dark curtain which I had not perceived 
before, — while, in a sort of automatic imitation of his 
patron's movements, the boy with the wild eyes followed 
him and crouched beside him on the floor, watching him. 
Slowly, and with a fastidious lingering tenderness, he 
drew the drapery aside, and at the same time pushed back 
the blind from an upper window, thus allowing the light 



226 wormwood: 

to fall fully on the canvas displayed. I stared at it fasci- 
nated, yet appalled, — it was so sombrely grounded, that for 
a moment I could not grasp the meaning of the weird and 
awful thing. Then it grew upon me by degrees, and I 
understood the story it told. It was the interior of a vast 
church or cathedral, gloomy and unillumined save by one 
or two lamps which were burning low. In front of the 
altar knelt a priest, his countenance distorted with mingled 
rage and grief, wrenching open, by the sheer force of his 
hands, a coffin. Part of the lid, split asunder, showed a 
woman's face, still beautiful with a strangely seductive, 
sensuous beauty, though the artist's touch had marked the 
blue disfiguring shadov/ of death and decay beginning to 
set in about the eyes, nostrils, and corners of the mouth. 
Underneath the picture was written in distinct letters 
painted blood-red — " O Dieu que f abjure I Rends-moi cette 
fenime! " 

A whole life's torture was expressed in the dark and 
dreadful scene, — and on me it had a harrowing nervous 
effect. I thought of Silvion Guidel, — a'nd my limbs shook 
under me as I approached to look at it more nearly. The 
savage child curled up on the floor, fixed its eyes upon 
me as I came, and pointing to the picture, muttered — 

'''' Joli I Joli I II vieurt / — rtest-ce-pas qu''il meurt ? " 

Gessonex heard him and laughed. 

" Out chere brute, il meurt ! He dies of disappointed 
passion, as we all die of disappointed something or other, 
if it only be of a disappointment in one's powers of breath- 
ing. What do you think of it, Beauvais t " 

" It is a magnificent work ! " I said, and spoke truly. 

" It is ! — I know it is ! " he responded proudly. " But 
all the same I will starve like a rat in a hole rather than 
sell it ! " 

I looked at him in surprise. 

''Why?" 

" Why > Because I want my name properly advertised 
when I am dead, — and the only way to get that done 
royally is to bequeath the picture to France ! France, 
having nothing to pay for it, will be liberal of praise, — 
and the art-critics knowing my bones cannot profit by 
what they say, will storm the world with loud eulogium ! " 

He dropped the curtain over the painting and turned 
upon me abruptly. 



IVORMIVOOD. 227 

" Tell me, Beauvais, have you tasted absinthe again 
since that night we met ? " 

" Of course ! Frequently ! " 

His eyes flashed into mine with a sinp^ularly bright and 
piercing regard. Then he seizjd my hand and sliook it 
with great fervor. 

" That is right I I am glad ! Only don't let the charm- 
ing fairy master you, lieauvais ! — always remember to keep 
the upper hand, as I do !'^ 

He laughed boisterously and pushed his long matted 
locks from his temples ; of course I knew he was r.s m 
fatuated a prey to the fatal passion as myself. No one 
loves absinthe lukewarmly, but always entirely and 
absorbingly. 

" Come ! " he cried presently. " Let us do something 
amusing ! Let us go to the Morgue ! " 

"To the Morgue!" I echoed, recoiling a little, — T had 
seen the place once long ago and the sight had sickened 
me — " V\ hy to the Morgue just now ?" 

" Because it is dusk, vion ami^ — and because the charm 
of the electric light will grace the dead ! If you have 
never been there at this hour, it will be a new experience 
for you, — really it is a most interesting study to any one 
of an artistic temperament 1 I prefer it to the theatre ! 
— pray do not refuse me your company ! " 

1 thought a moment, and then decided I would go with 
him. He, putting on his hat, turned to the "brute" 
child. 

*' Wait till I come back, mon singe I ^^ he said, patting 
its towzled mane, — " Kill rats and eat them if thou wilt, — 
I have at present nothing else for thee." 

Hearing these words I took out a couple of francs from 
my pocket and offered them to the boy. For a second he 
stared as if he could not believe his eyes, — then uttered 
such an eldritch screech of rapture as made the rafters 
ring. He kissed the money — then crawled along the floor 
and kissed my feet, — and finally sprang up and dashed 
away down the rickety stairs with the speed of a hunted 
antelope, while Gessonex looking after him, laughed. 

" He is a droll little creature ! " he said. " Now he will 
buy no end of things with those two silver coins, — he 
knows how to bargain so well that he will get double what 
I should get with the same amount, — moreover the people 



228 WORMWOOD. 

about here are afraid of his looks and his savage jabber- 
ing, and will give him anything to be rid of him. Yet the 
nature of the animal is such that he will put all his pur- 
chases on this table, and sit and glare at the whole menu 
without touching a morsel till I come back ! He is like 
a dog, fond of me because I feed him, — and in this, 
though a barbarian, he resembles the rich man's civilized 
poor relations i " 



iyOHMWOOJX 229 



XXIV. 

We left the house together and walked through the 
wretched slum in which it was situated, I looking sharply 
from right to left to see whether, among the miserable 
women who were gathered gossiping drearily at different 
doorways, there was any one like Pauline. But no, — they 
were all ugly, old, disfigured by illness or wasted by starva- 
tion, — and they scarcely glanced at us, though the fantastic 
Gessonex took the trouble to raise his battered hat to them 
as he passed, caring nothing for the fact that not one of 
them, even by way of a jest, returned his salutation. We 
soon traversed the streets that lay between the quarter we 
had left and the Morgue, and arrived at the long, low 
gruesome-looking building just as a covered stretcher was 
being carried into it. Gessonex touched the stretcher 
in a pleasantly familiar style. 

" Qui va Id ? " he inquired playfully. 

One of the bearers glanced up and grinned. 

*' Only a boy, m'sieu ! — Crushed on the railway." 

" Is that all ! " and Gessonex shrugged his shoulders — 
" Dieii 1 How uninteresting ! " 

We entered the dismal dead-house arm-in-arm, — the 
light was not turned full on, and only a pale flicker 
showed us the awful slab, on which it is the custom for 
unknown corpses to be laid side by side, with ice cold 
water dripping and trickling over them from the roof 
above. There were only two there at the immediate mo- 
ment, — the crushed boy had to be carried away '''■pour 
/aire sa toilette " before he could be exposed to public 
view. And not more than five or six morbid persons be- 
sides ourselves were looking with a fascinated inquisitive- 
ness at that couple of rigid forms on the slab, — the 
emptied receptacles of that mysterious life-principle which 
comes we know not whence, and goes we know not where. 
As I have said, the light was very dim, and it was difli- 



230 WORMWOOD. 

cult to discern even the outlines of these two corpses, — 
and Gessonex loudly complained of this inconveience. 

" Sacre-bleu! We are not in the catacombs ! " he 
exclaimed. " And when a great artist like myself visits 
the dead, he expects to see them, — not to be put to the 
trouble of guessing at their lineaments ! " 

Those who were present stared, then smiled and seemed 
to silently agree with this sentiment, — and just then 
a sedate official-looking personage made his sudden ap- 
pearance from a side-door, and recognizing Gessonex 
bowed politely. 

" Fardon m^sieu ! " said this individual — " The light 
shall be turned on instantly. The spectators are not 
many ! " This apologetically. 

Gessonex laughed and clapped him on the shoulder. 

" Ha ! Thou art the man of little economies, mon 
ami I " he said. " Thou dost grudge even the dead their 
last lantern on the road to Styx ! Didst never hear of the 
Styx .'* — no matter ! Come, come, — light up ! It may be 
we shall recognize acquaintances in yonder agreeably 
speechless personages, — one of them looks, in this dim 
twilight, amazingly massive, — a positively herculean mon- 
ster ! " 

The official smiled. 

" A monster truly ! That body was found in the 
river two days ago, and m'sieu is perhaps aware that the 
water distends a corpse somewhat unpleasantly." 

With these words and an affable nod he disappeared, 
— and something — I know not what, caused me to care- 
lessly hum a tune, as 1 pressed my face against the glass 
screen, and peered in at the death-slab before me. Sr.d- 
cLnly the light flashed up with a white glare, — ^""ot, bril- 
liant, and dazzling, and for a moment I saw nothing. But 
1 heard Gessonex saying — 

" The old lady is prettier than the young man in this 
case, Benuvais ! Death by poison is evidently more 
soothing to the muscles than death by drowning 1 " 

I looked, — and gradually my aching sense of vision 
took in the scene. — The first corpse, the one nearest to 
me, was that of the woman of whom Gessonex spoke; 
— some one standiniijclos'jby began detailing her wretched 
instory, — how sluj h.id, i:i a ft cf madness, killed herself 
by eating rat-poisun. I icr features were quite placid — the 



WORMWOOD. 



«3^ 



poor old withered body was decently composed and ripjid, 

and the little drops ot iricklint^ water rolled off her pnrciied 
skin like pearls. But that other thing that lay there a 
little apart, — that other dark, livid, twisted mass, — was it, 
could it be all that was mortal of a man ? 

*' What is that ? " I asked, pointing at it, a little vaguely 
no doubt, for my head throbbed, and I was conscious of a 
peculiar straining, choking sensation in my throat that 
rendered speech difficult. 

" * That ' was a man, but is so no longer ! " returned 
Gessonex lightly. " He is now an It, — and as an It is 
remarkably hideous ! — so hideous that lam quite fasci- 
nated ! I really must have a closer look at death's handi- 
work this time, — come, Beauvais I — M. Jeteaux knows 
me very well, and will let us pass inside." 

M. Jeteaux turned out to be the official personage who 
had previously spoken to us, — and on Gessonex stating that 
he wanted to make a sketch of that drowned man, but 
that from outside the glass screen he could not see the 
features properly, we were very readily allowed to enter. 

" Only that the face is hardly a face at all," said M. 
Jeteaux with affable indifference. " One can scarcely 
make out its right lineaments. The oddest thing about 
this particular corpse is that the eyes have not been de- 
stroyed. It must have been floating to and fro in the 
water three days if not more, and it has been here two, — 
but the eyes are like stone and remain almost uninjured." 

Thus speaking, he accompanied us close up to the 
marble slab, and the full view of the dead creature loomed 
darkly upon us. The sight was so ghastly that for a 
moment the careless Gessonex himself was startled, — 
while I, — I staggered backward slightly, overcome by a 
reeling sense of nausea. Ugh ! — those blue, swollen, 
contorted limbs ! — It had been impossible to straighten 
them, so said the imperturbable M. Jeteaux, — in fact a 
" toilette " for this twisted personage had been completely 
beyond the skill of the valets of the Morgue. I mastered 
the sick fear and abhorrence that threatened to unsteady my 
nerves, — and came up, out of sheer bravado, as closely 
as I could to the detestable thing, — I saw its face, all 
horribly distended, — its blue lips which were parted widely 
in a sort of ferocious smile, — its great protruding eyes, — 
God ! — I could hardly save myself from uttering a shrielj 



232 U^ORMWOOD. 

as the man J^teaux, desirous ^f being civil to Gessonex, 
lifted the unnaturally swollen head into an upright posi- 
tion, and those stony yet wet-glistening eyes stared 
vacantly at me out of their purple sockets ! J knew them * 
— truth to tell I had known this repulsive corpse all the 
time if I had only dared to admit as much to myself ! 
And if I had had any doubts as to its identity, those doubts 
would have been dispelled by that straight scar on the 
left temple, which, as the drenched hair was completely 
thrown back from the forehead, w^as distinctly visible. 
Yes ! — all that was mortal of Silvion Guidel lay there 
before me, within touch of my hand, — I the murderer stood 
by the side of the murdered ! — and as far as I could con- 
trol myself, I showed no sign of guilt or horror. But 
there was a loud singing and roaring about me like the 
noise of an angry river rising into flood, — my brain was 
giddy, — and I kept my gaze pertinaciously fixed on the 
body out of sheer inability to move a muscle or to utter a 
word. The cool business-like voice of M. Jeteaux close 
at my ear, startled me horribly though, and nearly threw 
me off my guard. 

" He was a priest," — said the official with a slight ac- 
cent of contempt — " the clothes prove that," — and he in- 
dicated by a gesture a set of garments (/recognized them 
well enough !) hanging up, as is the Morgue custom, im- 
mediately above the corpse they once covered, — " but of 
what Order, and where he came from no one can tell. 
We found a purse full of money upon him, and a breviary 
with no name inside, — he has not been identified and he 
will not keep any longer, — so to-morrow he will be re- 
moved." 

" Where to .? " I inquired, — my voice sounding thick 
and far away, and I coughed violently, as a sort of excuse 
for huskiness. 

Gessonex laughed. He was busy making a rapid 
pencil sketch of the corpse. 

" Where to ? My dear friend, to the comfortable 
*fosse,^ — the ditch of death wherein we all drown in the 
end. Of course we can have our own private patches of 
ditch if we choose to pay for such a luxury, — but we shall 
fertilize the earth better if we allow ourselves to be thrown 
all together in one furrow, — it is more convenient to our 
survivors, and we may as well be obliging. The public 



IVORMIVOOD. 2,^3 

^fosse^ is really the most sensible sort of grave, and the 
most truly reHgious because it is the most equalizing. 
This man " — and he gave a few artistic finishing touches 
to his sketch — " was evidently good-looking once." 

Jeteau smiled incredulously. 

Arsicu is an artist, and can imagine good looks where 
none have ever existed,' he observed politely. 

" Not at all," — returned Gessonex still working rap- 
idly with his pencil. "This body is certainly very much 
swollen by the water, but one can guess the original 
natural outlines. The limbs were finely moulded, — the 
shoulders and chest were strong and nobly formed, — the 
face — yes ! — it is probable the face was an ideal one — there 
are faint marks upon it that still indicate beauty, — the 
eyes were evidently remarkable, — why Beauvais ! — what 
pleasant jest amuses you .'' " 

For I had broken out into an uproarious fit of laughter, 
— laughter that I could no more restrain than an hyster- 
ical woman can restrain her causeless tears. And when 
Gessonex and his friend Jeteaux stared at me in surprise 
I became fairly convulsed and laughed more than ever ! 
Presently, struggling for utterance — 

'•''Mon Dieu !^^ I said. "Would you have me play 
tragedian over such a spectacle as this .? M. Jeteaux 
says he was a priest ! — well, look at him now, how well 
he represents his vocation ! Is not his mouth most 
piously open and ready to say an ' Ave ! ' — and his eyes 
— those admirable eyes ! — have they not quite the ex- 
pression of sanctimonious holiness so ingeniously prac- 
ticed by all of his crafty calling ? — A priest, you say ! — a 
worshipper of God, — and see what God has done for him ! 
Defaced his beauty, if beauty he ever had, and brought 
him to the Morgue ! — what a droll way this God has of 
rewarding His sworn servants ! " 

M, Jeteaux appeared vaguely troubled by my words. 

" Perhaps he was a bad priest," — he suggested. 
" There are many, — and this one may have committed so 
flagrant an error of discipline that he probably imagined 
the only way out of it was suicide." 

I laughed again. 

" Oh ! you think him a suicide ? " 

" Assuredly ! There are no marks of violence, — and 
besides, he was not robbed of his money." 



^34 JVORAmVOD. 

These foolish officials ! Always the same ideas and 
the same routine ! Inwardly I congratulated myself on 
my own cunning, — and turning to Gessonex, asked him 
if he had finished his sketch. 

" Though what you want it for I cannot imagine 1 " I 
added irritably. 

Gessonex shrugged his shoulders. 

" Only for the sake of study," he returned. "Just to 
see what Death can do for a man's anatomy ! See ! " — 
and he touched the throat of that which had been Guid^l, 
— " the arteries here are swollen, and in such a way, that 
one could almost fancy he had been strangled ! Again, 
observe the ribs, — they start through the flesh, — not from 
meagreness, but from having made a powerful effort, — a 
struggle for life. Here the sinews of the leg are strained 
as though they had used all their resisting power against 
some opposing body. I am not an artist for nothing," — 
he continued, affably turning to Jeteaux — " and I assure 
you, life did not go easily or willingly out of this priest, 
—he was probably murdered." 

Curse him and his knowledge of anatomy, I thought ! — 
why the devil could he not hold his tongue ! M. Jeteaux 
howevef only smiled, shrugged his shoulders as Gessonex 
had done, and spread out his hands with a deprecatory 
gesture. 

" Mais — m'sieu, there are no proofs of such a crime," 
he said. " And besides — a priest ! " 

" True ! " I interposed, the passion of ribald laughter 
once more threatening me, — " a dead priest is a ridiculous 
object ! A dead dog or a dead cat is more worthy of pity 
in these times ! France — our France — has nobly declared 
herself sick of priests, mo?z ami^^ — and I clapped him 
familiarly on the shoulder — "and one less in the world is 
a relief to us all ! " 

Jeteaux was quite delighted with this remark. 

"M'sieu is a thinker.? "he queried pleasantly, as we 
left the Morgue death-chamber, and turned our backs on 
the livid mass of perishing clay once called " /<f beau " 
Silvion Guidbl. 

" In a way — yes 1 " I responded swiftly. "I think as 
Paris thinks — that life is a bagatelle^ and death a 
satisfactory finish to the game I And to invent a God 
and pay priests to keep up the imposture is a disgrace 



U^O/?Mlf^OOD, 235 

to humanity and civilization ! But we are progressing 
quickly ! — we shall soon sweep away the old legends 
and foolish nursery superstitions — and bury them, — 
bury them, — as — as yonder lump of dead priestcraft is 
to be buried to-morrow, — in the common * fosse,' the 
/eceptacle for all decayed and useless lumber which ob- 
structs or is offensive to the world ! " I paused, — then 
on a sudden impulse added — " He is to be buried to- 
morrow — positively ? " 

J^teaux looked surprised. 

** The body in there ? — Jlfais, certainement, m'sieu ! — it 
could not be kept another day ! " 

This idea diverted me extremely. " It " could not be 
kept another day 1 Here was this brave Silvion Guid^l, 
— once beautiful as Antinous, brilliant, witty, amorous, 
— he was no more than so much tainted flesh that 
could not be kept above ground another day ! And I 
had brought about this pleasant end for him — even 1 1 
I had murdered him, — I could have identified him, — 
and yet — no one guessed — no one imagined the secret 
that there was between that quiet corpse and me ! 
Despite my efforts I laughed wildly again, when we went 
out of the Morgue, though I did not venture to give an- 
other backward glance through the glass screen, — 
laughed so loudly and long that Gessonex, always easily 
moved, began to laugh also, and soon agreed with me that 
the sight of a dead priest was after all a very amusing 
entertainment. 

" Let me see your sketch " — I said to him presently, 
when we stopped a moment to light our cigarettes, — 
then, as he handed it to me — " It's not badly done ! — but 
you have made the eyes like saucers ! ''Bon Dieii !^ they 
seem to say — '■ R ends-mo i la grace d''etre amoureux pour 
tine fois, qiioique je suis pretre 1 Qii' est-ce-que la vie sans 
aimer une femme /' " 

I broke into another laugh, and with an air of complete 
unconsciousness, tore the sketch into minute fragments, 
and sent the bits floating on the breeze. Gessonex 
uttered a quick exclamation. 

" Sacre-ble:i I Do you know what you have done, 
Beauvai:s .'' " 

I looked p.t Iiim blankly. 

"No I What?" 



236 WORMWOOD, 

" You have torn up my sketch ! " 

*' Have I ? Positively I was not aware of it ! 1 
thought it was a bit of waste paper ! Forgive me ! — I 
often get frightfully abstracted every now and then, — ever 
since I took to drinking absmf he !^^ 

He turned upon me with nervous suddenness. 

^^ JDieu / Have you taken to drinking it then, as a 
matter of course ? " 

" As a matter of life ! — and death ! " I replied curtly. 

He stared at me, and seemed to tremble, — then he 
smiled. 

" Good ! Then — you must also take the conse- 
quences ! " 

" I find the consequences fairly agreeable, — at pres- 
ent." 

" Yes — so you may, — so you will, — until " He 

broke off, then looked sharply behind him, — he had an 
unpleasant trick of doing that I noticed, — and he had 
frequently startled and annoyed me by those quick glances 
backwards over his own shoulder ; — " Can you see him ? " 
he whispered abruptly, a peculiar expression coming into 
his eyes as they met mine. 

" See him .'* See whom ? " I queried amazed. 

He laughed lightly. 

" A friend, — or rather I should say, a creditor ! He 
wants his bill paid, — and I am not disposed to settle with 
him — not just yet ! " 

We were standing at the quiet corner of a quiet street, 
— I looked from right to left, and round and about every- 
where, but not a soul could I perceive but our two selves. 

I shrugged my shoulders. 

" Pshaw 1 You are dreaming, Gessonex 1 " He smiled, 
— very strangely, I thought. 

" So are you ! " he responded calmly. " Dreaming 
heavily, — a fiery, drunken dream ! I know ! — I know all 
the pleasure of it — the madness of it ! But absinthe has 
its waking hours as well as its sleep, — and your time for 
waking xias not come. But it will come, — you may be 
sure of that ? " He paused, — then added slowly — " I am 
sorry you tore up my sketch ! " 

" I also regret it, mon cher !^^ I declared, puffing away 
at my cigarette — ** But it was an ugly memory, — why did 
you want to keep such a thing ? " 



tj' o/^Afwoon. 237 

" To remind me of death " — he replied, — " to teach me 
how hideous and repulsive and loathsome the fairest of 
us may become when the soul has been snatched out of 
us and lost in the elemental vortex. God ! — to think of 
it ! — and yet, whih the soul still remains in us we are 
loved, — actually loved /'^ 

"While the li/e is in us, you mean ! " I said, with a cold 
smile. " There is no soul, so say the Positivists." 

*' The soul — the life ; " — murmured Gessonex dreamily 
— " are they not one and the same ? 1 think so. The 
vital principle, — the strange ethereal essence that colors 
the blood, strings the nerves, lights the eyes, and works 
the brain, — we call it Life, — but it is something more than 
life — it is Spirit. And imagine it, Beauvais ! — we have it 
in our own power to release that subtle thing, whatever 
it is, — we can kill a man and lo ! — there is a lump of clay 
and that strange essence has gone ! — or, we can kill our- 
selves, — with the same result. Only, one wonders, — what 
becomes of us ? " 

" Nirvana ! — Nothingness ! " I responded airily. 
" That is the Buddhist idea of eternal bliss — an idea that 
is very fashionable in Paris just now ! " 

Gessonex turned his great wild eyes up«_J me with a 
look of vague reproach. 

"Fashionable in Paris!" he echoed bitterly — "even 
so may one talk of being fashionable in Hell ! The city 
that permits the works of a Victor Hugo to drop gradu- 
ally into oblivion, and sings the praises of a Zola who 
with a sort of pitchfork pen turns up under men's nos- 
trils such literary garbage as loads the very air with stench 
and mind-malaria ! — faugh ! Religion of any sort for 
Paris in its present condition is absurd, — it is like offer- 
ing the devil a crucifix ? Do not accept Paris opinions, 
Beauvais ! — there is something more than ' nothingness ' 
even in apparently clear space " — and he glanced about 
him with an odd touch of dread in his manner — " Believe 
me, there is no nothingness ! " He paused, — laughed a 
little, and passed his hand across his brows as though he 
swept away some unpleasing thought. " Good-night ! " 
he said then, — " I must return to my eiifant terrible^ who 
will starve till I come. Again I wish you had not torn up 
that sketch ! " 

" So do I, as you harp upon the subject so persist* 



238 WORMWOOD. 

ently " — I said, with mingled irritation and contrition,— 
the latter feeling I feigned as best I could — " I am really 
very sorry ! Shall we go back to the Morgue and ask 
permission to take another view ?" 

" No, no ! " — and Gessonex shuddered slightly — " I 
could not look at that dead priest again ! — There was 
something clamorous in his eyes, — they were alive with 
some ghastly accusation 1 " 

I forced a smile. 

" How unpleasantly grim you are this evening, Ges- 
sonex ! " I said carelessly. " I think I will leave you 
to your own reflections. Ati revoir f" 

" Wait ! " he exclaimed eagerly ; and catching my 
hand in his own he pressed it hard. " I <2w ' grim,' as 
you say — I know it ! I am at times more gloomy than a 
monk whose midnight duty it is to dig his own grave to 
the sound of a muffled bell. But it is not always so ! — 
my natural hu'rnor is gay, — mirthful enough to please 
the wildest bo7i viveur^ I assure you ! You shall see me 
again soon, and we will have sport enough ! — tell me 
where I can meet you now and then .'' " 

I named a cafe on the Boulevard Montmartre, — a 
favorite resort for many a sworn absintheur. 

" Ah ! " he said laughingly. *' 1 know the place, — it 
is too grand for me as a rule, — I hate the light, the 
gildmg, the painted flowers, the ugly fat dame de comptoir^ 
— but no matter ! — I will join you there some evening. 
Expect me ! " 

*' When .? " I asked. 

" Soon ! When my creditors will allow me to appear 
in public 1 Bon soir J " 

He lifted his hat with his usual fantastic flourish, — 
smiled, and was gone. I drew a deep breath of relief. 
For some moments the strain on my nerves had been 
terrific, — I could scarcely have endured his companion- 
ship a moment longer. I looked about me. I was in 
a very quiet thoroughfare, — there were trees, and seats 
under the trees, — but I was near the river, — too near ! 
I turned resolutely away from it, and walked onward, — 
walked till I found myself in the lively and brilliant 
Avenue de I'Opdra. Here I presently saw a man pacing 
slowly ahead of me, clad in a priest's close black gar- 
ments. He annoyed me terribly, — 1 had no desire to be 



WORMJl^OOD. 239 

reminded of priestcraft just then. Could I ;iot get in 
front of this leisurely strolling fool ? J hurried my steps, 
— and with an effort came up with him, — passed him — 
looked round- and recognized Sih'ion GiiidU . . . Sil- 
vion Guidbl, — pale-faced, dreamy-eyed, serene as usual, — 
only, ... as 1 stared wildly at him, his lips fell apart in 
the horrible leering smile 1 had seen on the face of the 
corpse in the Morgue ! Heedless of what I did, I struck 
at him fiercely, — my clenched fist passed through his 
seeming substance ! — he vanished into impalpable noth- 
ingness before my eyes ! I stamped and swore, — a 
hand seized and swung me to one side. 

" Va-t-e7i bete/" said a rough voice. " 7u ^e guises trap 
fort!'' 

Drunk ! I ! I reeled back from the push this insolent 
ydbser-by had given me, and rallying my forces took to 
walking again as rapidly as possible, concentrating all 
my energies on speed of movement ; and refusing to 
allow myself to think. 

I soon reached a cafe whereof I was a known frequenter, 
and called for the one, the only elixir of my life, the 
blessed anodyne of conscience, the confuser of thought, 
and drank and drank till the very sense of being was 
almost lost, and all ideas were blurred and set awry in 
my brain, — drank, till with every vein burning and every 
drop of blood coursing through my body like hissing fire, 
I rushed out into the calm and chilly night, maddened 
with a sort of furious, evil ecstasy that was perfectly in- 
describable ! The spirit of a mocking devil possessed 
me, — a devil proud as Milton's Satan, insidious as 
Byron's Lucifer, and malevolently cunning as Goethe's 
Mephistopheles, — the world seemed to me a mere child's 
ball to kick and spurn at. — the creatures crawling on it, 
stupid emmets born out of a cloud of dust and a shov.'er 
of rain ! Yes — I was maddened — gloriously maddened ! 
maddened into a temporary forgetfulness of my crime of 
Murder ! — and bent on some method of forgetting it 
still more and more utterly ! Where should I go ? — what 
should I do ? In what resort of fiends and apes could I 
hide myself for a while, so as to be sure, quite sure that 
I should not again meet that pale yet leering shadow of 
Silvion Guidbl ? 



240 WORMWOOD. 



XXV. 

Pausing for a moment, while the pavement rocked 
unsteadily beneath me, I tried to shape some course of 
immediate action, but found that impossible. To return 
to my own rooms and endeavor to rest was an idea that 
never occurred to me ; rest and I were strangers to each 
other. I could not grasp at any distinct fact or thought, 
^— I had become for the time being a mere beast, with 
every animal instinct in me awake and rampant. Intel- 
ligence, culture, scholarship — these seemed lost to me, — 
they occupied no place in my drugged memory. Nothing 
is easier than for a man to forget such things. A brute 
by origin, he returns to his brute nature willingly. And 
I, — I did not stand long considering or striving to con- 
sider my own condition there where I was, close by the 
Avenue de I'Op^ra, with the stream of passers-by coming 
and going like grinning ghosts in a dream, — I hurled my- 
self, as it were, full into the throng and let myself drift 
with it, careless of whither I went. There were odd 
noises in my ears, — ringing of bells, beating and crashing 
of hammers, — it seemed to my fancy that there, spread 
out before me was a clear green piece of water with a great 
ship upon it ; — the ship was in process of building and I 
heard the finishing blows on her iron keel, — the throbbi.ig 
sound of her panting engines ; — I saw her launched, when 
low ! — her giant bulk split apart like a sundered orange — 
and there, down among her sinking timbers lay a laughing 
naked thing with pale amber hair, and white arms entwined 
round a livid corpse that crumbled into a skeleton as I 
looked, — and anon, from a skeleton into dust ! All the 
work of ray Absinthe-witch ! — her magic lantern of strange 
pictures was never exhausted ! I rambled on and on — 
heedless of the people about me, — eager for some dis- 
traction and almost unconscious that I moved, — but burn- 
ing with a sort of rapturous rage to the finger-tips, — a 



IVORMIVOOD. 241 

sensation that would easily have prompted and persuaded 
me to any deed of outrage or violence. Mark me here, 
good reader, whosoever you are 1 — do not imagine for a 
moment that my character is an uncommon one in Paris ! 
Not by any means ! The streets are full of such as I am, 
— men, who, reeling home in the fiiria of Absinthe, will 
not stop to consider tl>e enormity of any crime, — human 
wolves who would kill you as soon as look at you, or kill 
themselves just as the fancy takes them, — men who would 
ensnare the merest child in woman's shape, and not only 
outrage her, but murder and mutilate her afterwards, — 
and then, when all is done, and they are by some happy 
accident, caught and condemned for the crime, will smoke 
a cigar on the way to the guillotine and cut a joke with 
the executioner as the knife descends ! You would rather 
not know all this perhaps ? — you would rather shut your 
eyes to the terrific tragedy of modern life and only see 
that orderly commonplace surface part of it which does not 
alarm you or shock your nerves? I dare say! — just as 
you would rather not remember that you must die ! But 
why all this pretence ? — why keep up such a game of 
Sham ? Paris is described as a brilliant centre of civili- 
zation, — but it is the civilization of the organ-grinder's 
monkey, who is trained to wear coat and hat, do a few 
agile tricks, grab at money, crack nuts, and fastidiously 
examine the insect-parasites of his own skin. It is not a 
shade near the civilization of old Rome or Athens, — nor 
does it even distantly resemble that of Nineveh or Baby- 
lon. In those age-buried cities, — if we may credit his- 
torical records, — men believed in the dignity of manhood, 
and did their best to still further and ennoble it ; — but we 
in our day are so thoroughly alive to our own ridiculous- 
ness generally, that we spare neither time nor trouble in 
impressing ourselves wdth the fact. And so our most 
successful books are those which make sport of, and find 
excuse for, our vices, — our most paying dramas those 
which expose our criminalities in such a manner as to just 
sheer off by a hair's-breadth positive indecency, — our 
most popular preachers and orators those which have 
most rant, and most hypocrisy. And so we whirl along 
from hour to hour, — and the heavens do not crack, and 
no divine thunderbolt slays us for our misdeeds — if they 
are misdeeds ! Assuredly the Greek Zeus was a far mor^ 
16 



242 WORMWOOD. 

interesting Deity than the present strange Immensity of 
Eternal Silence, in which some people perchance feel the 
thought-throbbings of a vast Force which broods and 
broods and waits, — waits maybe for a fixed appointed time 
when the whole universe as it now is, shall disperse like 
a fleece of film, and leave space clear and clean for the 
working out of another Creation. 

As I tell you, if I had wanted money that night, I 
would have murdered even an aged and feeble man to 
obtain it ! If I had wanted love, — or what is called 
love in Paris, I would have won it, either by flattery 
or force. But I needed neither gold nor woman's 
kisses, — of the first I still had sufficient, — of the sec- 
ond, why ! — in Paris they can always be secured at the 
cost of a few napoleons and a champagne supper. No ! 
— I wanted something that gold could not buy nor 
woman's lips persuade, — Forgetfulness ! — and it en- 
raged me to think that this was the one, the only thing 
that my Absinthe-Vv^itch would not give me in all its 
completeness. Some drinkers of the Green Elixir there 
are who can win this boon, — they sink into an apathy 
that approaches idiotism, as the famous Dr. Charcot 
will tell you, — they almost forget that they live. Why 
could not /do this? Why could I not strike into frag- 
ments at one blow, as it were, this burning, reflecting, 
quivering dial-plate of memory that seared and scorched 
my brain .'' Aimlessly hurrying on as though bound 
on some swift errand, yet without any definite object 
in view, I arrived all at once in front of a gateway 
over which a garish arch of electric light flashed its 
wavering red, blue, and green, — a sort of turnstile 
wicket marked the side-entrance, with an inscription 
above it in large letters — " Bal Masqui^ ! Entree 
Libre ! ! " There are plenty of such places in Paris of 
course, though I had never set foot in one of them, — 
dancing-saloons of the lowest type where the *' Entree 
Eibre " is merely held out as a bait to attract a large 
and mixed attendance. Once inside, everything has to 
be paid for, — that is always understood. It is the same 
rule with all the cafes chantants — one enters gratis, — 
but one pays for having entered. The sound of music 
reached me where I stood, — wild, harsh music such 
as devils might dance to, — and without taking a 



IVOKMIVOOD. 343 

second's thought about it,— for I could not think, — I 
twisted the b.irs of the lurnslilc violenily and rushed 
in, — into the midst of hurly-burly such as no painter's 
brush lias ever dared devise, — a scene that could not 
be witnessed anywhere save in "civilized" Paris. In 
a long saiic^ tawdry wiih bright paint and common 
gilding, whirled a crowd of men and women fantasti- 
cally attired in all sorts of motley costumes, — some as 
clowns, others as sheeted corpses, — others as laun- 
dresses, fishermen, sailors, soldiers, vi-i^andieres^ — here 
was a strutting caricature of Boulanger, — there an ex- 
aggerated double of the President of the Republic — 
altogether a wild and furious crew, shrieking, howling, 
and dancing like lunatics just escaped from detention. 
Some few wore masks and dominos, — but the greater 
part of the assemblage \vere unmasked, — and my en- 
trance, clad merely as a plain civilian excited no sort 
of notice. I was to the full as de rigeur for such an 
entertainment as any one else present. I flung my- 
self into the midst of the gesticulating, gabbling vortex 
of people with a sense of pleasure at being surrounded 
by so much noise and movement, — here not a soul 
could know me, — here no unpleasant thought or fanci- 
ful impression would have time to write itself across 
my brain, — here it was better than being in a wilder- 
ness, — one could yell and scream and caper with the 
rest of one's fellow-apes and be as merry as one chose 1 
I elbowed my way along, and promised an officious 
but very dirty waiter my custom presently, — and while 
I tried to urge my muddled intelligence into a clearer 
comprehension of all that was going on, the crowd 
suddenly parted asunder with laughter and shouts of 
applause, and standing back in closely pressed ranks 
made an open space in their centre for the approach 
of two women discreetly masked, — one arrayed in very 
short black gauze skirts, the other in blood-red. At- 
titudinizing for a moment in that theatrical pose which 
all dancers assume before commencing the revolutions, 
they uttered a peculiar shout, half savas^e, half mirth- 
ful, — a noisy burst of music answered them, — and then, 
with an indescribable slide forward and an impudent 
bracing of the arms akimbo, they started the "- can- 
can" — which though immodest, vile, vulgar, and licen* 



244 fVO/^MWOOD. 

tious, has perhaps more power to inflame the passions 
of a Paris mob than the chanting of the " Marseillaise." 
It can be danced in various ways this curious fandango 
of threatening gesture and amorous invitation, — and 
if the dancers be a couple of heavy Paris laundresses 
or petroleuses, it will probably be rendered so ridiculously 
as to be harmless. But, danced by women with lithe, 
strong, sinuous limbs — with arms that twist like the 
bodies of snakes, — with bosoms that seem to heave with 
suppressed rage and ferocity, — with eyes that flash hell- 
fire through the black eye-holes of a conspirator-like 
mask, — and with utter, reckless, audacious disregard of 
all pretence at modesty, — its effect is terrible, enraging ! 
— inciting to deeds of rapine, pillage and slaughter ! 
And why ? Why, in Heaven's name, should a mere 
dance make men mad? Why? — Mild questioner, who- 
ever you are, I cannot answer you ! Why are men made 
as they are ? — will you tell me that ? Why does an Eng- 
lish Earl marry a music-hall singer ? He has seen her in 
tights, — he has heard her roar forth vulgar ditties to the 
lowest classes of the public, — and yet he has been known 
to marry her, and make her " my lady " — and a peeress of 
the realm ! Explain to me this incongruity, — and I will 
explain to you then why it is that the sight of the ^Uan- 
€aji^^ danced in all its frankness, turns Parisian men for 
the time being into screeching, stamping maniacs, whom 
to see, to hear, to realize the existence of, is to feel that 
with all our ' culture,' we are removed only half a step 
away from absolute barbarism ! On me, the spectacle of 
those two strong women, the one wearing the color of 
the grave, the other the color of blood, acted as a sort 
of exhilarating charm, — and I howled, stamped, shrieked, 
and applauded as furiously as the rest of the onlookers. 
More than this, when the dance was over, I approached 
the black siren and besought her to honor me with her 
hand in a waltz — an invitation which I accompanied by a 
whisper in her ear — a whisper that had in it the chink of 
base coin rather than the silvery ring of courtly homage, 
— she had her price of course, like all the women there, 
and that price 1 paid. I whirled her several times round 
the room — for she waltzed well, — and finally, sitting 
down by her side, asked her, or rather I should say com- 
manded her, as I was paymaster for the evening, to 



WOPAnVOOD. i»45 

remove her mask. She did so, — and displayed a hand- 
some coarse visage, — badly rouged and whitened with 
pearl powder, — her way of life had rendered her old be- 
fore her time, — but the youth and wickedness in her 
magniticent eyes made amends for her premature 
wrinkles. 

" Tiens, Madame ! Comme tu es laide ! " I said with 
brusque candor. " Mais c'est une jolie laideur ! " 

She laughed harshly. 

" Oui ! je suis laide — je le sais ! " she responded indif- 
ferently. " Que veux-tu, mon jeune farouche } J' at 
vecu ! 

It was my turn to laugh now, and I did so uproariously. 
She had Iroed — she ! She thought so, in all good faith, — 
she believed she knew life inside and out and all through. 
She who had probably never opened a noble book or 
looked at a fine picture, — she, who would certainly have 
no eyes for scenery or the wonder and science of Nature, 
— she, whose experience had been limited to the knowl- 
edge of the most despicable side of despicable men's 
characters ; — she had livedo which was tantamount to say- 
ing that she comprehended the object and intention of 
living ! What a fool she was ! — what a shallow-brained 
fool ! — and yet, it is for such women as she that men 
occasionally ruin themselves and their families. The 
painted successful wanton of the stage never lacks dia- 
monds or flowers, — the honest wife and mother often 
lacks bread ! Such is the world and the life of the world, 
— and God does nothing to improve it. What an impas- 
sively dumb spectator of things He is in His vast, clear 
empyrean ! Why does He not " rend the heavens and 
come down " — as the old Psalmist implored Him to do, — 
then we should understand, — we should not have to wait 
for death to teach us. And the question is, will death 
teach us ? Is death a silence, or an overpoweringly pre- 
cise explanation 1 Ah ! — at present, not knowing, we 
laugh at the idea, — but it is a laugh with a shudder in it ! 

Well ! I danced again and yet again with the female 
fiend who had " lived," as she said, — I gave her cham- 
pagne, ices, bonbons, — all that her greedy appetite de- 
manded, and I watched her with a certain vague amuse- 
ment, as she ate and drank and laughed and jested, while 
the wine flushed her cheeks and lent an extra devilish 



i^S WOI^MIVOOD, 

sparkle to her eyes. Between the dances, we sat together 
in a sort of retired alcove adorned with soiled hangings 
of faded crimson, and at the next table to us, in a similar 
kind of compartment, were a clown and a harlequin, — the 
clown a man, the harlequin a woman. These two were 
noisily drunk — and they sang scraps of song, whistled 
and screeched alternately, the female harlequin sometimes 
beating her sword of lath against her knees, and anon 
laying it with a resonant '' crack ! " across her grinning 
companion's shoulders. Half stupefied myself, and too 
confused in mind to understand even my own actions, 
I stared at this pair of fools disporting themselves much 
as I might have stared at a couple of dancing bears in a 
menagerie — and then growing suddenly tired of their 
rough antics, my eyes wandered from them down and 
across the length and breadth of the salle^ v/here the van- 
colored crowd still twirled and flitted and swung to and 
fro, like a merry-go-round of puppets at a fair. And then 
I perceived a new figure in the throng, — a stranger in 
black, who looked curiously out of place and incongruous, 
so I fancied, — and I turned to my siren of the " can-can." 
who with both her muscular white arms folded on the 
table, was staring hard at me with, as I thought, an ex- 
pression of intense inquisitiveness, not unmixed with 
fear. 

" Voild / " I said laughing. " A priest at a bal masque! 
Does he not look droll ? See what temptations these 
gentlemen of the Church yield to ! " 

She turned her black eyes in the direction I indicated. 

'' What priest ? " she asked.—" Where ? '* 

''There!" 

And I pointed straight before me into the salle, where I 
plainly saw the individual I meant, — a man, wearing the 
closely buttoned-up clerical black garment I had learned 
to abominate so heartily. " I do not see him ! " she said. 
" No real priest would dare to come here, I fancy ! Some 
one in priest's clothes perhaps — dressed up for fun — yes 1 
— that is very likely. A priest is always ridiculous 1 
Find him, and I will dance with him ! " 

I laughed again, and flipped her on the bare arm that 
lay nearest to me. 

"You will be a fool if you do 1 " I told her carelessly. 
** He will have no mont;y for you, and you have had 



WO/^AfWOOD. 247 

enough champagne. 77icyj h^ is! — there, with his back 
turned to us ! Don't you see luiu now ? " 

She stared and stared, — then shrugged her shoulders. 

"No!" 

A sudden horrible fear froze my blood. I sprang up 
from my seat. 

" Come ! " I said hoarsely. " Come ! — Quick ! — Give 
me another dance and dance your best ! " 

I snatched her round the waist, and whirled her into 
the throng with so much celerity and violence that she 
nearly lost her footing and fell — but I cared little for 
that, — I plunged madly with her through the room and 
straight up to the spot where that priest was standing — 
standing quite still. 

'' Look, — look ! " I whispered, " You can see him 
plainly enough ! — I told you he was a priest, and I was 
right ! Look ! — he does not move ! " 

Under her rouge her face grew very pale. ^'Ou done t " 
she murmured nervously. '''' Je ne vois rie?i ? " 

Closer and closer we waltzed towards that motionless 
shape of a man, and I saw the dark outline of his figure 
more and more distinctly. 

" You can touch him now ! " I said, my voice shaking 
as I spoke. " Your dress brushes against him ! — what ! — 
have you no eyes ! — Ah, diable ? " — And I uttered a furi- 
ous cry as the figure turned its face upon me, Silvion 
Guidel again, by all the Furies of fact or fiction ! — Silvion 
Guidbl ! . . . And this time, as I looked, he moved away 
rapidly, and began to slip stealthily through the crowd ; — 
roughly flinging my partner from me I followed fast, 
striking out right and left with my two hands to force a 
passage between the foolish flocks of dancing masquer- 
aders, — I heard shrieks of terror and amazement, — shouts 
of " II est fou / — // est foil ! " — but I heeded nothing — 
nothing save that black figure gliding swiftly on before 
me, — nothing until in my wild headlong rush I w^as 
stopped by the sudden consciousness of being in the 
fresh air. The wind blev/ coldly on my face, — I saw the 
moonlight falling in wide patterns around me, — but — was 
I alone ? No ! — for Silvion Guidbl stood there also, by the 
side of a great tree that spread its huge boughs down- 
wards to the ground, — he gazed straight at me with wist- 
ful, beautiful, impassioned eyes, — but no smile crosse4 



24S tVOI^MtVOOD. 

the quiet pallor of his countenance. He looked — yes !— 
exactly as he had looked before I murdered him 1 . . . 
Perhaps — perhaps, I thought vaguely — there was some 
mistake ? — perhaps I had not killed him after all ! he 
seemed still to be alive ! 

" Silvion ! " I whispered. *' What now ? Silvion ! " 
A light breeze rustled the branches overhead, — the 
moonbeams appeared to gather and melt into a silvery 
sea — and I sprang forward, resolvedly intent on grasping 
that substantial-looking form in such a manner as to es- 
tablish for myself the fact of its actual existence, — it rose 
upward from my touch like a cloud of ascending smoke 
and vanished utterly ! . . . while I, striking my forehead 
sharply against the rough trunk of the tree where the ac- 
cursed phantom of my own brain had confronted me, fell 
heavily forward on the ground, stunned and insensible I 



WORM WOOD. 249 



XXVI. 

I LAY there in a dead stupor for some hours, but I was 
roused to my senses at last by the ungentle attentions of 
2i gendarme, who grasped and shook me to and fro as if I 
were a bag of wheat. 

^'- LH-e-toi ! Get up, beast! " he growled, his rough 
provincial accent making the smooth French tongue 
sound like the ugly snarl of a savage bull-dog. " Drunk 
at nine in the morning ! A pretty way of earning the 
right to live ! " 

I struggled to my feet and stared haughtily at him. 

" I am a gentleman ! " I said. " Leave me alone ! " 

The fellow burst out laughing. 

" A gentleman ! Truly, that is easily seen ! One of 
the old aristocracy doubtless ! " 

And he picked up my hat, — it was entirely battered in 
on one side, — and handed it to me with a derisive bow. 

I looked at him as steadily as I could, — everything 
seemed to flicker and dance to and fro before my eyes, 
— but I remembered I had some money left in my pock- 
ets. I searched, — and drew out a piece of twenty 
francs. 

" What do you know about gentlemen or aristocrats ? " 
I said. *' Do you not measure them all by this 1 " — and 
I held up the gold coin — '' you called me a beast, — what 
a mistake that was ! A drunken beggar is a beast if you 
like, but a grafid seigneur who amuses himself ! " here I 
dropped the piece into his quickly outstretched palm — 
" C'est autre chose, n'est ce pas, mo?i ami? " 

He touched his hat, — and the laughter was all on my 
side now ! He locked such a ridiculous puppet of offi- 
cialism ! 

'''' Mais Qui, monsieur I — mais oui!^^ he murmured con- 
fusedly, pocketing his gold. " Milk pardons / . . . c'est le 
devoir^ — vous le savez .... enjin — monsieur , jai Vhonneur 
de vous saluer P^ 



*5«> 



tVORMWOOD. 



And he edged himself away with as much dignity as 
was possible in the very undignified position he occu- 
pied, — namely that of taking money to prove a beast a 
gentleman ! His first exclamation at sight of me was 
honest, and true, — my condition was worse than bestial, 
for beasts never fall so low as men, — and he knew it and- 
/knew it! But for twenty francs he could be made to 
say, — " Monsieur, fai rhonneur de voiis saluer " — Poor 
devil ! — Only one out of thousands like him in this droll 
world where there is so much bombastic prating about 
Duty and Honor ! 

Nine o'clock in the morning ! So late as that ! — 1 
looked about me, and realized that I was close to the 
Champs Elysees, I could not imagine how I had come 
there, nor could I remember precisely where I had been 
during the past night. I was aware of a deadly sense of 
sickness, and I was very unsteady on my feet, so that I 
was obliged to walk slowly. My hat was damaged be* 
yond repair, — I put it on as it was, all crushed and 
beaten in, — and what with my soiled linen, disordered 
garments and unkempt hair, I felt that my appearance 
was not, on this fine bright morning in Paris, altogether 
prepossessing. But what did I care for that .'' — Who was 
to see me ? — who was to know me ? Humming the scrap 
of a tune under my breath I sauntered giddily along, — 
but the horrible sickness upon me increased with every 
step I took, and finally I determined to sit down for a 
while, and try to recover a firmer hold of my physical 
faculties. I staggered blindly towards a bench under the 
trees, and almost fell upon it, thereby knocking heavily 
against an upright dignified-looking old gentleman who 
just then happened to cross my path, and to whom I 
feebly muttered a word or two by way of apology. But 
the loud cry he gave startled me into a wide-awake con- 
dition more successfully than any cold douche of water 
could have done. 

'' Gaston !— My God ! Gaston I '' 

I stared stupidly at him with eyes that blinked painfully 
in the spring sunshine, — who was he, this tidy, respect- 
able, elderly personage who, pale as death, regarded me 
with the terror-stricken air of one who sees some sudden 
epectral prodigy? 

" Gaston 1 " he cried again. 



tVOI^AflVOOD. 25 X 

Ah ! — Of course ! I knew him now ! My father I 
Actually my father ! — who would have thought it I I felt 
in a dim sort of way that 1 had no further claim to re- 
lationship with this worthy piece of honesty, — and I 
laughed drowsily as I made a feeble clutch at my battered 
hat and pulled it off to salute him. 

'' Fardieuf I murmured. *' This is an unexpected 
meeting, mon ptre ? I rejoice to see you looking so well 1 " 

White to the lips, he still stood, staring at me, one hand 
grasping his golcl-headed cane, — the other nervously 
clenching and unclenching itself. Had I had any sense 
of filial compassion or decency left, which I had not, I 
should have understood that the old man was suffering 
acutely from such a severe shock as needed all his physical 
courage and endurance to battle against, and I should 
have been as sorry for him as I ought ; but in the con- 
dition I was, I only felt a kind of grim amusement to 
think what a horrible disappointment I must be to him I 
His son ! // I laughed again in a stupid sort of fashion, 
and surveying my ill-used hat I remarked airily — 

" My presence in Paris must be a surprise to you, sir? 
I suppose you thought I was in Italy ? " 

He paid no attention to my words. He seemed quite 
stunned. Suddenly, rousing his faculties, as it were by a 
supreme effort, he made a stride towards me. 

" Gaston ! " he exclaimed sharply, " what does this 
mean ? Why are you here ? What has happened to you ? 
W^hy have you never written to me ? — what is the reason 
of this disgraceful plight in which I find you ? Mo?t Dieul 
— what have I done to deserve this shame .'* " 

His voice shook, — and his wrath seemed close upon 
the verge of tears. 

" What have you done, mon pere ? — wh}?-, nothing 1 " I 
responded tranquilly. "Nothing, I assure you! And 
why talk of shame ? No shame attaches to you in the 
very least ! Pray do not distress yourself ! You ask me 
a great many questions, — and as I am not particularly well 
this morning " 

His face softened and changed in an instant, and he 
advanced another step or two hurriedly. 

"Ah ! — you are ill ! — you have been suffering and have 
never told me of it," he said, with a sort of eager relief 
and solicitude. " Is it indeed so, my poor Gaston ? — why 



252 WORMWOOD. 

then forgive my hastiness ! — here, — lean on my arm and 
let me take you home ! " 

A great lump rose in my throat, — what a good simple 
old fellow he was, — this far-away half-forgotten individual 
to whom I dimly understood I. owed my being ! He was 
ready to offer me his arm, — he, the cleanly respectable 
honorable banker whose methodical regularity of habits 
and almost fastidious punctilio were known to all his 
friends and acquaintance, — he v/ould, — if I had made ill- 
ness my sole excuse, — he would have actually escorted my 
draggled, dirty, slouching figure through the streets with 
more than the tenderness of the Good Samatitan ! I ! — a 
murderer ? — I smiled, — his simplicity was too sincere to 
merit any further deception from me. 

*' You mistake ! " I said, speaking harshly and with 
difficulty. " I am not ill, — not with the sort of illness that 
you or any one else could cure. I've been up all night, — 
dancing all night, — drunk all night, — going to the devil 
all night ! — ah ! that surprises you, does it ? Efifin ! — I do 
not see why you should be surprised ! — On va avec son 
Steele ! " 

He retreated from me, and a frown of deepening in- 
dignation and scorn darkened his fine features. 

" If this is a jest," he said sternly, " it is a poor one 
and in very bad taste ! Perhaps you will condescend to 
explain " 

" Oh, certainly ! " and I passed my hand in and out my 
rough uncombed hair — " Voyons ! where shall I begin ? 
Let me consider your questions. Imprimis., — what does 
this mean ? Well, it means that the majority of men are 
beasts and the minority respectable ; — needless to add 
that I belong to the majority. It is the strongest side, 
you know ! — it always wins ! Next, — why am I here ? I 
really can't tell you — I forget what I did last night, and, 
as a natural consequence, my wits have gone wool-gather- 
ing this morning. As for being still in Paris itself instead 
of running away to other less interesting parts of Europe, 
I really, on consideration, saw no reason why I should 
leave it — so in Paris I stayed. One can lose one's self in 
Paris quite as easily as in a wilderness. I have kept 
out of your way, and I have not intruded my objection- 
able presence upon any one of our mutual friends. I did 
not write to you, because — well ! — because I imagined it 



WORMWOOD. 253 

was better for you to try and forget me. To finish — you 
ask what has happened to me, — and what the reason is of 
this my present condition. 1 fiave taken to a new pro- 
fession — that is all ! " 

" A new profession ! " echoed my father blankly. " What 
profession ? " 

I looked at him steadfastly, dimly pitying him, yet feel- 
ing no inclination to spare him the final blow. 

'' Oh, a common one among men in Paris ! " I re- 
sponded with forced lightness — " well known, well ap- 
preciated, — well paid too albeit in strange coin. And 
perhaps the best part of it is, that once you adopt it you 
can never leave it, — it does not allcAV for any caprice or 
change of humor. You enter it, — and there you are ! — an 
idee fixe in it \ brain ! " 

The old man drew himself up a little more stiffly erect 
and eyed me with an indignant yet sorrowful wonder. 

*' 1 do not understand you," he said curtly. *' To me 
you seem foolish, — drunk, — disgraced ! I cannot believe 
you are my son ! " 

" I am not ! " I replied calmly. " Do not recognize me 
as such any longer ! In the way I have chosen to live 
one cuts all the ties of mere relationship. I should be no 
use to you, — nor would you — pardon me for saying so ! — 
be any use to me ! What should I do with a home or 
home associations ? — I, — an absintheiir !"" 

As the word left my lips, he seemed to stagger and sway 
forward a little, — I thought he would have fallen, and in- 
voluntarily I made a hasty movement to assist him ; — but 
he waved me back with a feeble yet eloquent gesture, — 
his eyes flashed, — his whole form seemed to dilate with 
the passion of his wrath and pain. 

" Back ! Do not touch me ! " he said in low fierce 
accents. " How dare you face me with such an hideous 
avowal! An absintkeur ? You! What! You, my son, 
a confessed slave to that abominable vice that not only 
makes of its votaries cowards but madmen } My God ! 
Would you had died as a child, — would I had laid 
you in the grave, a little innocent lad as I remember 
you, than have lived to see you come to this ! An 
absinthcur ! In that one word is comprised all the worst 
possibilities of crime ! Why — why in Heaven's namq 
have you fallen so low ? " 



254 WOI^MWOOD. 

" Low ? " I repeated. " You think it low ? Well,— 
that is droll ! Is it more low for example than a woman's 
infidelity? — a man's treachery ? Have 1 not suffered, and 
shall I not be comforted ? Some people solace themselves 
by doing their duty, and sacrificing their lives for a cause 
— for an idea ; — and sorry recompense they win for it in 
the end ! Now, I prefer to please myself in my own fash- 
ion — the fashion of absinthe. I am perfectly happy, — why 
trouble about me ? " 

His eyes met mine, — the brave honest eyes that had 
never known how to play a treachery, — and the look of 
unspeakable reproach in them went to my very heart. 
But I gave no outward sign of feeling. 

" Is this all you have to say ? " he asked at last. 

" All ! " I echoed carelessly. " Is it not enough ? '* 

He waited as if to gather force for his next utterance, 
— and when he spoke again, his voice was sharp and re- 
sonant, almost metallic in its measured distinctness. 

" Enough, certainly ! " he said. " And more than 
enough ! Enough to convince me without further argu- 
ment, that 1 have no longer a son. My son, — the son I 
loved and knew as both child and man, is dead, — and I do 
not recognize the fiend that has arisen to confront me in 
his disfigured likeness ! You — you were once Gaston 
Beauvais, — a gentleman in name and position, — yoU; who 
now avow yourself an ahsifitheicr, and take pride in the 
disgraceful confession ! My God ! — I think I could have 
pardoned you anything but this, — any crime would have 
seemed light in comparison with this wilful debauchery of 
both intelligence and conscience, without which no man 
has manhood worthy of the name ! " 

I peered lazily at him from between my half-closed eye- 
lids. He had really a very distinguished air ! — he was 
altogether such a noble-looking old man ! 

" Good ! " I murmured affably. " Very good ! Very well 
said ! Platitudes of course, — yet admirably expressed I " 

His face flushed, — he grasped his stick convulsively. 

*' By Heaven ! " he muttered, " I am tempted to strike 
you ! " 

" Do not ! " I answered, smiling a little — " you would 
soil th^t handsome cane of yours, and possibly hurt your 
hand. I really am not worth the risk of these two contin- 
gencies \ " 



WORMWOOD. 355 

He gazed at me in blank amazement. 

" Are you mad ? " he cried. 

" I don't think so," I responded quietly. " I don't feel 
so ! On the contrary, I feel perfectly sane, tranquil, and 
comfortable ! It seems to me that you are the mcidman 
in this case, mon pcrc ! — forgive me for the brusqucrie of 
the observation ! " 

"II" he echoed with a stupefied stare. 

" Yes — you ! You who expect of men what is not in 
them, — you, who would have us all virtuous and respect- 
able in order to win the world's good opinion. The 
world's good opinion ! pshaw ! Who, knowing how the 
world forms its opinion, cares a jot, for that opinion when 
it is formed ? Not I ! I have created a world of my own, 
where I am sole law^-giver, — and the code of morality / 
practice is au fond precisely the same as is followed under 
different auspices throughout society ; namely : I please 
myself I — which, after all, is the chief object of each man's 
existence." 

Thus I rambled on half incoherently, indifferent as to 
whether my father stayed to listen to me or went away in 
disgust. He had however now regained all his ordinary 
composure, and he held up his hand with an authoritative 
gesture. 

" Silence ! " he said. " You shame the very air you 
breathe ! Listen to me, — understand well what I say, — ■ 
and answer plainly if you can. You tell me you have 
become an absintheur^ — do you know what that means ? " 

" I believe I do," I replied indifferently. " It means^ 
in the end, — death." 

" Oh, if it meant only death ! " he exclaimed passion- 
ately. " If it meant only the common fate that in due 
time comes to us all I But it means more than this — it 
means crime of the most revolting character, — it means 
brutality, cruelty, apathy, sensuality, and mania ! Have 
you realized the doom you create for yourself, or have 
you never thought thus far .? " 

I gave a gesture of weariness. 

" Mon pere, you excite yourself quite unnecessarily ! I 
have thought, till I am tired of tliinking, — I have conned 
over all the problems of life till I am sick of the useless 
study. What is the good of it all.? For example, — you 
are a banker, — I was your partner in business (you see 



256 IVORMWOOD. 

I use the past tense though you have not formally dis- 
missed me) ; now what a trouble and worry it is to con- 
sume one's days in looking after other people's money ! 
To consider another profession, — the hackneyed one of 
lighting for *La Patrie.' What does * La Patrie' care for 
all the blood shed on her battle-fields ? She is such a 
droll ' Patrie ! ' — one week, slie shrieks out * Alsace-Lor- 
raine/ E?i reva7icher — the next, she talks calmly through 
her printing-presses of making friends with Germany, and 
even condescends to flatter the new German Emperor ! 
In such a state of things, who would endure the toil and 
moil of military service, when one could sit idle all day in 
a caje^ drinking absmihe comfortably instead ! Ah, bah ! 
Do not look so indignant, — the days of romance are over, 
sir ! — we want to do as we like with our lives, — not to be 
coerced into wasting them on vain dreams of either virtue 
or glory ! " 

My father heard me in perfect silence. When I had 
finished speaking — 

"That is your answer ? " he demanded. 

"Answer to what? Oh, as to whether I undei stand 
the meaning of being an absifitheur. Yes ! — that is my 
answer, — I am quite happy ! — and even suppose I do 
become a maniac as you so amiably suggest, I have heard 
that maniacs are really very enviable sort of people. They 
imagine themselves to be kings, emperors, popes, and 
what not, — it is just as agreeable an existence as any 
other, I should imagine ! " 

" Enough ! " and my father fixed his eyes upon me with 
such a coldness of unutterable scorn in them, as for the 
moment gave me a dim sense of shame, — " I want to hear no 
more special pleadings for the most degrading and loath- 
some vice of this our city and age. No more, I tell you ! 
— not a word ! What / have to say you will do well to 
remember, and think of as often as your besotted brain 
ean think ! First, then, in the life you have elected to 
lead, you will cease to bear my name." 

I bowed, smilingly serenely. 

" Ca va safis dire! I have already ceased to bear it," I 
answered him. " Your honor is safe with me, sir, I assure 
you, though 1 care nothing for my own ! " 

He went on as though he had not heard me. 

" You will no longer have any connection with the Bank, 



woRAnvoon. 



257 



— nor any -share in its concerns. I shall take in your 
place as my partner your cousin Emil Versoix." 

I bowed again. Emil Versoix was my father's sister's 
son, a bright young fellow of about my own age ; what an 
opening for him, 1 thought ! — and how proud he would be 
to get the position I had voluntarily resigned ! 

"I shall send you," continued my father, "whatever 
sums are belonging to you on account of your past work 
and share with me in business. That, and no more. 
When that is spent, live as you can, but do not come to 
me, — our relationship must be now a thing dissolved and 
broken forever. From this day henceforth I disown you, 
— for I know that the hideous vice you pander to, allows 
for no future repentance or redemption. I had 2^. son ! " 
— and his voice quivered a little, — "a son of whom I was 
too fondly, foolishly proud, — but he is lost to me, — lost as 
utterly as the unhappy Pauline, or her no less unhappy 
lover, Silvion Guidel." 

I started and a tremor ran through me. 

" Lost ! — Silvion Guidel ! " I stammered — " How ! — 
lost^ did you say .? " 

** Aye, lost ! " repeated my father in melancholy accents 
— " If you have not heard, hear now, — for it is you who 
caused the mischief done to be simply irreparable ! Your 
quondam friend, made priest, was sent to Rome, — and 
from Rome he has disappeared, — gone, no one knows 
where. All possible search has been made, — all possible 
inquiry, — but in vain, — and his parents are mad with grief 
and desolation. Like the poor child Pauline, he has van- 
ished, leaving no trace, — and though pity and forgiveness 
would await them both were they to return to their homes, 
as yet no sign has been obtained of either." 

" They are probably together ! " I said, with a sudden 
fierce laugh. " In some sequestered nook of the world, 
loving as lovers should, and mocking the grief of those 
they wronged ! " 

With an impetuous movement my father raised his c^ne, 
— and I certainly thought that this time he would have 
struck me, — but he restrained himself. 

" Oh callous devil ! " he cried wrathfully — "is it pos- 
sible " 

" Is what possible ? " I demanded, my rage also rising in 
a tumult. " Nay, is it possible you can speak of ' pity and 

«7 



258 WORMWOO'bT 

forgiveness* for those two guilty fools ? Pity and forgive- 
ness ! — the prodigal son with the prodigal daughter wel- 
come back, and the fatted calf killed to do them honor ! 
Bah ' What fine false sentiment ! I — I" — and I struck 
my biedst angrily — " I was and am the principal sufferer 1 
— but see you ! — because I win consolation in a way that 
harms no one bi.t myself, — /am disinherited — / am dis- 
owned — /am cast out and spurned at, — while she, Pauline 
the wanton, and he, Guidel, the seducer, are being searched, 
for tenderly, high and low, to be brought back when found 
to peace and pardon! Oh, the strange justice of the 
world ! Enough of all this, — go ! — go, you who were my 
father ! — go ! why should we exchange more words ? You 
have chosen your path, — I mine! and you may depend 
upon it, the much admired and regretted Silvion Guidel 
has chosen /^/>f / Go! — why do you stand there staring 
at me ? " 

For I had risen, and confronted him boldly, — he seemed 
nothing more to me now than a man grov/n foolish in his 
old age and unable to distinguish wrong from right. No 
one was near us, — we stood in a sequestered corner of the 
Champs Elysees, and from the broader avenues came 
ringing betv/een-whiles the laughter and chatter of chil- 
dren at play. He, — my father — looked at me with the 
strained startled gaze of a brave man wounded to the 
death. 

" Can sorrow change you thus ? " he said slowly. " Are 
you so much of a moral coward that you will allow a 
mere love-disappointment in youth to blight and wither 
to nothingness your whole career "^ Are you not man 
enough to live it down ? " 

*' I am living it down," I responded harshly. " But, in 
my own way ! I am forgetting the world and its smug 
hypocrisies and canting mockery of virtue ! I am ceasing 
to care whether women are faithful or men honorable, — 
I know they are neither, and I no longer expect it. I am 
killing my illusions one by one ! When a noble thought, 
or a fine idea presents itself to me (which is but seldom !), 
I spring at its throat and strangle it, before it has time to 
breathe 1 For I am aware that noble thoughts or fine ideas 
are the laughing-stock of this century, and that the stupid 
dreamers who indulge in them are made the dupes of the 
age ! You look startled 1 — well you may ! — to you, mon 



WORMIVOOD. 259 

pire, I am dangerous, — for — I loved you ! and what 1 
once loved is now become a mere reproach to me, — a 
blackness on my horizon — an obstruction in my path — so, 
k-jep out of my way, if you are wise ! 1 promise to keep 
OMt cf yours. The money you offer me 1 wiil not li ive, — 
I wiil beg, steal, starve, — anything, rather th.in t.iUe one 
ceniime from you, even though it be my ri:;ht tj claim tlie 
residue of w'lat 1 earned. You shall sje my face no 
more, — I wiil die and make no sign — 10 you 1 am djad 
already— let me bj for-^utten then as tliC dead always ri' 
forgotten — in spile cf the monuments raised to th. 
memory. 

He gave a despairing gesture. 

"Gaston ! ' he cried. "*' You kill me I " 

I surveyed him tranquilly. 

*' Not so, vio'i pere — i kill myself, — not you ! You will 
live many years yet, in peace and safety and good repute 
among men, — and you will easily console yourself for the 
son you have lost in new ties and new surroundings. For 
you are not a coward, — I am ! 1 am afraid of the very 
life that throbs within me, — it is too keen and devilish — 
it is like a sliarp sword-blade that eats through its scabbard, 
—I do my best to blunt its edge ! Blame me no more, — 
think cf me no more, — 1 am not worth a single regret, and 
I do not seek to be regretted. I loved you once, mon 
ph'e, as 1 told you — but now, if I saw much of you, — of 
your independent air, your proud step, your sincere 
eyes — I dare say, I should hate you ! — for I hate all things 
honest ! It is part of my new profession to do so " — and 
I laughed wildly — " Honesty is a mortal affront to an 
absijiihair ! — did you not know that .f* However, though 
the offence is great, I will not fight you for it — we will part 
friends I Adieu !" 

I held out my hand. He looked at it, — but did not 
touch it, — but deliberately put his cane behind his back, 
and folded his own two hands across it. His face was 
paler than before and his lips were set. His glance 
swept over me with unutterable reproach and scorn, — 1 
smiled at his expression of dignified disgust, — and as I 
smiled, he turned away. 

" Adieu, vio'i pert'/ " I said again. 

He gave no word or sign in answer, but with a slow, 
quiet, composed step paced onward, —his head erect, — his 



26o WORMWOOD. 

shoulders squared, — his whole manner as irreproachable 
as ever. No one could have thought he carried worse 
than a bullet-wound in his heart ! /knew it — but I did 
not care. I watched his tall figure disappear through the 
arching foliage of the trees without regret, — without 
remorse — indeed with rather a sense of relief than other- 
wise. He was the best friend I ever had or should have 
in the world — this I realized plainly enough — but the 
very remembrance of his virtues bored me ! It was tire- 
some to think of him, — and it was better to lose him, for 
the infinitely more precious sake of — AbsinUiet 



WOItM^^OOD* 261 



XXVTI. 

I PASSED the rest of that day in a strange sort of semi- 
somnolence, — a state of stupid dull indifferentism as to 
what next should happen to me. I cannot say that I 
even thought, — for the powers of thinking in me were 
curiously inert, almost paralyzed. The interview I had 
had with my father faded away into a sort of pale and 
blurred remembrance — it seemed to have taken place 
years ago instead of hours. That is one of the special 
charms of the Absi7ithe-furia ; it makes a confused chaos 
of all impressions, so that it is frequently impossible to 
distinguish between one event occurring long ago and 
one that has happened quite recently. True, there are 
times when certain faces and certain scenes dart out 
vividly from this semi-obscure neutrality of color, and 
take such startling shape and movement as to almost dis- 
tract the brain they haur^t and intimidate, — but these 
alarms to the seat of reason are not frequent, — at least, 

not at first. Afterwards But why should I offer you 

too close an explanation of these subtle problems of 
:nind-attack and overwhelmment ? I tell you my own ex- 
perience ; — you can, and I dare say you will, pooh-pooh 
it as an impossible one, — the mere distraught fancy of an 
excited imagination, — but, — if you would find out and 
prove how truly I am dissecting my own heart and soul 
for your benefit, why take to Absifitke yourself and see ! — 
and describe the result thereafter more coherently than I 
— if you can ! 

All day long, as I have said, I roamed about Paris in a 
dream, — a dream wherein hazy reflections, dubious won- 
derments, vague speculations, hovered to and fro without 
my clearly perceiving their drift or meaning. I laughed 
a little as I tried to imagine what my father would have 
said, had he known what had truly become of Silvion 
Guidbl I If he could hare guessed that I had murdered 



262 WORMWOOD. 

him ! What would he have done, I wondered ? Prob- 
ably he would have given me up to the police ; — he had 
a frightfully strained idea of honor, and he would never 
have been brought to see the justice of my crime as I 
did ! It amused me to think of those stupid Breton folk 
searching everywhere for their *' bien aimt Silvion ; " and 
making every sort of inquiry about him, when all the 
while he was lying in the common yj?j-j^, festering away 
to nothingness ! Yes ! — he was nothing now, — he was 
dead — quite dead, — and yet, I could not disabuse myself 
of the impression that he was still alive ! My nerves 
were in that sort of condition that at any moment I ex- 
pected to see him, — it seemed quite likely that he might 
meet me at any corner of any street. This circumstance 
and others similar to it, make me at times doubtful as to 
whether Death is really the conclusion of things the posi- 
tivists tell us it is. True, the body dies — but there is 
something in us more than body. And how is it that 
when we look at the corpse of one whom we knew and 
loved, we always feel that the actual being who held our 
affections is no longer there ? If not there, then — where ? 
Silvion Guidel for instance was everywhere, — or so I felt, 
— instead of being got rid of as I had hoped, he seemed 
to follow me about in a strange and very persistent way, 
— so that when he was not actually visible in spectral 
ahpe, he was almost palpable in invisibility. This im- 
pression was so pronounced with me, that it is possible, 
had Ibeen taken unawares and asked some sudden ques- 
tion as to Guiddl's whereabouts, I should have answered. 
" He was with me here, just a minute ago ! " 

And yet — I had killed him ! I knew this, — knew it 
positively, — and knowing, still vaguely refused to believe 
it ! Everything was misty and indefinite with me,— • 
and the interview I had just had with my father soon be- 
came a part of the shadowy chiaroscuro of events uncer- 
tain and nameless of which I had no absolutely distinct 
memory. 

I stared into many shops that afternoon, and went into 
some of them, asking the prices of things I had no inten- 
tion of buying. 1 took a sort of fantastic pleasure in 
turning over various costly tritles of feminine adornment, 
such as bracelets, '-ecklci^-, dmi^ling chatr.laincs^ and use- 
less fripperies of a.l possible design, — things that catch 



tVORMlVOOJX 263 

the eye and charm the soul of almost every simpering 
daughter of Eve that clicks her high Louis Quinze heels 
along the asphalte of our Lutetian pavements and avenues. 
Why was it, 1 mused, that Pauline de Charmilles had not 
been quite like the rest of her sex in such matters? I 
had given her costly gifts in abundance, — but she had 
preferred the fire of Silvion's passionate glance ; and his 
kiss had outweighed in her mind any trinket of flawless 
pearl or glistening diamond ! Strange ! — Yet she was the 
child who laughed up in my eyes the first night I met her, 
and had talked in foolish school-girl fashion of her favo- 
rite " i7iarro?is glaces " / Heavens ! — what odd material 
women are made of ! Then, one would have thought a 
box of bon-bons sufficient to give her supremest delight, — a 
string of gems would surely have sent her into an ecstasy I 
— and yet this dimpling, babyish, frivolous, prattling 
feminine thing had dared the fatal plunge into the ocean 
of passion, — and there, — sinking, struggling, dying, — lost, 
— with fevered pulses and parched lips, — still clung to the 
frail spar of her own self-centred hope and drifted, — con- 
tent to perish so, thirsting, starving under the cruel stars 
of human destiny that make too much love a curse to 
lovers, — yes ! — actually content to perish so, — proud, thank- 
ful, even boastful to perish so, because such death was 
for Love's sweet-bitter sake 1 It was remarkable to find 
such a phase of character in a creature as young as Pau- 
line ; or so I thought, — and I v/ondered dimly whether / 
had loved her as much as she had loved Guidel. No 
sooner did I begin to meditate on this subject than 1 
felt that cold and creeping thrill of brain-horror which I 
know now (for it comes often and I fight as well as I 
can against it) to be the hint, — the far forewarning of 
madness, — wild, shrieking, untameable madness such as 
makes the strongest keepers of maniac-men recoil and 
cower ! I tell you, doubt it as you will, that my love for 
Pauline de Charmilles — the silly child who tortured and 
betrayed me, — was immeasurably greater than I myself 
had deemed it, — and I dare not even now dwell too long 
on its remembrance ! I loved her as men love who are 
not ashamed of loving, — every soft curl of hair on her 
head was precious to me, — otice ! — and as I thought upon 
it, it drove me into a paroxysm of impotent ferocity to re- 
call what I had lost, — how I had been tricked and fooled 



^64 WORMWOOD, 

and mocked and robbed of all life's dearest joys ! At 
one time, as I wandered aimlessly about the streets, I had 
a vague idea of setting myself steadily to track out the 
lost girl by some practical detective method, — of finding 
her, probably in a state of dire poverty and need, — and of 
forcing her still to be mine, — but this, like all other plans 
or suggestions of plans, lacked clearness or certainty in 
my brain, and I merely played with it in my fancy as a 
thing that possibly might and still more possibly might 
not be done ere long. 

I ate very little food all that day, and when the 
evening came I was conscious of a heavy depression 
and sense of great loneliness. This feeling was of course 
getting more and more common with me, — it is the 
deadly stupor of the absi?itheur which frequently precedes 
some startling phase of nightmare fantasy. I had a crav- 
ing, similar to that of the previous night for the rush of 
crowds, for light and noise, — so 1 made my way to the 
Boulevard Montmartre. Here throngs of people swept 
forward and backward like the ebb and flow of an ocean- 
tide, — it was fine weather, and the little tables in front 
of the cafks were pushed far out, some almost to the edge 
of the curbstone, — while the perpetual shriek and chatter 
of the Boulevard monkeys, male and female, surged 
through the quiet air with incessant reverberations of 
shrill discord. Here and there one chanced on the 
provincial British paterfamilias new to Paris, with his 
coffee in front of him, his meek fat-faced partner beside 
him, and his olive-branches spreading around, — and it is 
always to a certain extent amusing to watch the various 
expressions of wonder, offence, severity and general 
superiority which pass over the good stupid features of 
such men when they first find themselves in a crowd of 
Parisian idlers, — men who are so aggressively respectable 
in their own estimation that they imagine all the rest of 
the world, especially the Continental world, must be 
scoundrels. Once, however, by chance I saw a British 
" papa," the happy father of ten, coming out of a place of 
amusement in Paris where ce7-tes he had no business to 
be, — but I afterwards heard that he was a very good man, 
and always went regularly to church o' Sundays when he 
was at home I 1 suppose he made it all right with his 
conscience in that way. It is a droll circumstance, by the 



WORAflVOOD. 5^5 

bye, — that steady going-to-church of the EngHsh folk in 
order to keep up appearances in their respective neighbor- 
hoods. They know they can learn nothing there, — they 
know that their vicars or curates will only tell them the 
old platitudes of religion such as all the world has grown 
weary of hearing — they know that nothing new, nothing 
large, nothing grand can be expected from these narrow- 
minded expounders of a doctrine which is not of God nor 
of Christ, nor of anything save convenience and self- 
mterest, and yet they attend their dull services and 
sermons regularly and soberly without any more unbecom- 
ing behavior than an occasional yawn or brief nap in the 
corner of their pews. Droll and inexplicable are the 
ways of England ! — and yet withal, they are better than 
the ways of France when everything is said ^d done, I 
used to hate England in common with all Frenchmen 
worthy the name, — but now I am not so sure. I saw an 
English woman the other day, — young and fair, with 
serious sweet eyes, — she walked in the Champs Elysdes 
by the side of an elderly man, her father doubtless, — and 
she seemed gravely, not frivolously, pleased with what 
she saw. But she had that exquisite composure, that 
serene quietude and grace, — that fine untouchable delicacy 
about her air and manner which our women of France 
have little or nothing of, — an air which made me, the 
absintheur, slink back as she passed, — slink and crouch 
in hiding till she, the breathing incarnation of sweet and 
stainless womanhood, had taken her beauty out of sight, 
— beauty which was to me a stinging silent reproach, 
reminding me of the dignity of life, — a dignity which I 
had trampled in the dust and lost forever ! 

Yes ! — it was merry enough on the bright Boulevards 
that evening, — there were many people, — numbers of 
strangers and visitors to Paris among them. I strolled 
leisurely to the cafe I knew best, where my Absinthe- 
witch brewed her emerald potion wdth more than common 
strength and flavor, — and I had not sat there so very 
long, meditatively stirring round and round the pale-green 
liquor in my glass when I saw^ Andre Gessonex approach- 
ing. I remembered then that I had told him to meet me 
some evening at this very place on the Boulevard Mont- 
martre, though I had scarcely expected to see him quite 
SO soon. He looked tidier than usual, — he had evidently 



266 WORMWOOD. 

made an attempt to appear more gentlemanly than ever,— 
even his disordered hair had been somewhat arranged 
with a view to neatness. He saw me at once, and came 
jauntily up, — lifting his hat with the usual flourish. He 
glanced at my tumbler. 

" The old cordial ! " he said with a laugh. *' What a 
blessed remedy for all the ills of life it is, to be sure ! 
Almost as excellent as death, — only not quite so certain 
in its effects. Have you been here long ? " 

" Not long," I responded, setting a chair for him beside 
my own. " Shall I order your portion of the nectar .? " 

" Ah ! — do so ! " — and he stroked his pointed beard 
absently, while he stared at me with an unseeing, vague, 
yet smiling regard — " I am going to purchase a '' Jouriial 
f)Oiir Rire ' / — it has a cartoon that, — but perhaps you have 
seen it .? " 

I had seen it — a pictured political skit, — but its ob- 
scenity had disgusted even me. I say " even " me, — be- 
cause now I was not easily shocked or repelled. But 
this particular thing was so g atuitously indecent that, 
though I was accustomed to see Parisians enjoy both 
pictorial and literary garbage with the zest of vultures 
tearing carrion, I was somewhat surprised at their toler- 
ating so marked an instance of absolute grossness without 
wit. It astonished me too to hear Gessonex speak of it, 
— I should not have thought it in his line. However I 
assented briefly to his query. 

" It is clever " — he went on, still thoughtfully stroking 
his beard — " and it is a reflex of the age we live in. Its 
sale to-day will bring in much more money than I ask for 
one of my pictures. And that is another reflex of the 
age! I admire the cartoon, — and I envy the artist who 
designed it ! " 

I burst out laughing. 

" You I You envy the foul-minded wretch who pol- 
luted his pencil with such a thing as that?" 

" Assuredly ! " and Gessonex smiled, — a peculiar far- 
away sort of smile. " He dines, and I do not — he sleeps, 
and I do not, — he has a full purse, — mine is empty ! — 
and strangest anomaly of all, because he pays his way he 
is considered respectable,— wlnle I, not being able to pay 
my way, am judged as quite tlie reverse ! Foul-minded ? 
Polluted ? Tut, mon cher I there is no foul-mindedness 



IVORMWOOD. 267 

nowadays except lack of cash, — and the only pollution 
possible to the modern artist's pencil is to use it on work 
that does not pay !'' 

With these words he turned from me and went towards 
the little kiosque at the corner close by where the journals 
of the day were sold by the usual sort of painted and 
betrinketed female whom one generally sees presiding over 
these street-stalls of the cheap press, — and i watched him 
curiously, not knowing why I did so. He was always 
affected in his walk, — but on this particular evening his 
swaggering gait seemed to be intensified. I saw him take 
the ^'^ Journal pour Rirc''' in his hand, — and I heard him 
give a loud harsh guffaw of laughter at the wretched 
cartoon it contained, — laughter in which the woman who 
sold it to him joined heartily with the ready appreciation 
nearly all low-class Frenchwomen exhibit for the question- 
able and indelicate, — and I turned away my eyes from 
him vaguely vexed at his manner, — I had always deemed 
him above mere brute coarseness. It was to me a new 
phase of his character, and ill became him, — moreover it 
seemed put on like a mask or other disfiguring disguise. 
I looked away from him, as I say, — when, all at once, — 
the sharp report of a pistol-shot hissed through the air,^ 
there was a flash of flame — a puff of smoke, — then came 
a fearful scream from the woman at the kiosque, followed 
by a sudden rush of people, — and I sprang up just in 
time to see Gessonex reel forward and fall heavily to the 
ground ! In less than a minute a crowd had gathered 
round him, but I forced my way through the pressing 
throng till I reached his side, — and then, — then I very 
quickly realized what had happened ! Absinthe had 
done its work well this time ! — and no divine intervention 
had stopped the suicide of the body any more than it had 
stopped the suicide of the soul ! The powers of heaven 
are always very indifferent about these matters, — and 
Gessonex had taken all laws both human and superhuman 
into his own hands for the nonce, — he had shot himself ! 
He had coolly and deliberately sent a bullet whizzing 
throuc^h his brain, — liis fingers still convulsively grasped 
the weapon with which he hnd done the deed — his mouth 
was streaming wi:h blood — and the ''Journal pour Rire'^ 
with its detestable C"rto.)n. l:iy near him, spotted and 
Stained wi^h the same deadiy crimson hue. A ghastly 



2^^ WORMWOOD. 

sight ! — a horrible end ! — and yet — there was something 
indescribably beautiful in the expression of the wide- 
open, fast-glazing eyes ! Mastering my sick fear and 
trembling I bent over him, — a young surgeon who had 
happened to be passing by at the time was bending over 
him too, and gently wiping away the blood from his lips, 
—and to this man I addressed a hurried word. 

" Is he dead ? " 

" No. He still breathes. But, a couple of minutes, — 
et c'est fini ! " 

Gessonex heard, and made a slight movement to and 
fro with one hand on his breast. 

'' Oui, c'est fini ! " he muttered thickly. " Le dernier 
mot du Christ ! — le dernier mot de tout le monde ! — c'est 
fini ! Enfin — j'ai paye . . . tout ! " 

And stretching out his limbs with a long and terrible 
shudder he expired. The features whitened slowly and 
grew rigid — the jaw fell, — all was over ! I rose from my 
kneeling attitude on the pavement like one in a dream, — 
scarcely noting the awed and pitying faces of the crowd 
of by-standers, — and found myself face to face with a 
couple of gendarmes. They were civil enough, but they 
had their duty to perform. 

" You knew him ? " they asked me, pointing to the 
corpse. 

" Only slightly," — I responded, — " a mere acquaint- 
ance." 

" Ah ! But you can give us his name ? " 

" Assuredly ! Andre Gessonex." 

" What } The artist ? " exclaimed some one near me. 

" Yes. The artist." 

" Mon Dieu / What a calamity ! Andr^ Gessonex ! 
A genius ! — and we have so few geniuses ? Messieurs, 
c'est Andre Gessonex qui est mort ! grand peintre, voyez- 
vous ! — grand homme de France ! " 

I listened, stupefied. It was like one of the scenes of 
a wild nightmare ! "Grand homme de France ! " What! 
— so soon great, now that he was dead .'* Utterly bewil- 
dered I heard the name run from mouth to mouth, — peo- 
ple who had never known it before, caught it up like a 
watch-word, and in a moment the fever of French enthu- 
siasm liad spread all along the Boulevards. The man who 
had first started it, talked louder and louder, growing 



WORMWOOD. 269 

more and more eloquent with every bombastic shower of 
words he flung to his eager and attentive audience, — the 
excitement increased, — the virtues of the dead man were 
proclaimed and exalted, and his worth found out sud- 
denly and as suddenly acknowledged with the wildest 
public acclaim ! A stretcher was brought, — the body of 
Gessonex was laid upon it and covered reverently with a 
cloth, — I was asked for, and gave the address of the mis- 
erable room where the poor forlorn wretch hnd struggled 
for bare existence, — and in a very few minutes a proces- 
sion was formed, which added to its numbers with every 
step of the way. Women wept, — men chattered volubly 
in true Parisian fashion concerning the great gifts of one 
whom they had scarcely ever heard of till now, — and I 
watched it all, listened to it all in a vague incredulous 
stupor which utterly darkened all my capability of reason- 
ing out the mingled comedy and tragedy of the situation. 
But when the silly, hypocritical mourning-train had wound 
itself out of sight, I went away in my turn, — away from 
everything and everybody into a dusky, cool, old and un- 
requented church, and there in full view of the sculpt- 
fured Christ on the cross, I gave way to reckless laughter ! 
Yes ! — laughter that bordered on weeping, on frenzy, on 
madness, if you will ! — for w^ho would not laugh at the 
woeful yet ridiculous comedy of the world's ways and the 
world's justice ! Andre Gessonex, alive, might starve for 
all Paris cared, — but Andre Gessonex dead, hurried out 
of existence by his own act, was in a trice of time dis- 
covered to be ^^ gra7td homme de France P^ Ah, ye 
cruel beasts that call yourselves men and women ! 
— cruel and wanton defacers of God's impress on the 
human mind, if any impress of God there be, — is there no 
punishment lurking behind the veil of the Universe for 
you that shall in some degree atone to all the great who 
have suffered at your hands t To be nobler than com- 
mon is a sufficient reason for contempt and misprisal by 
the vulgar majority, — and never yet was there a grand 
spirit shut in human form, whether Socrates or Christ, 
that has not been laid on the rack of torture and wrenched 
piece-meal by the red-hot flaying-irons of public spite, 
derision, or neglect. Surely there shall be an atone- 
ment ? If not, then there is a figure set wrong in the 
mathematical balance of Creation, — a line awry, — a flaw 



ayo WORMWOOD. 

in the round jewel, — and God Himself cannot be Per- 
fect ! But why do I talk of God ? I do not believe in 
Him, — and yet, — one is always perplexed and baffled by 
the Inexplicable Cause of things. And, — somehow, — my 
laughter died away in a sob, as I sat in the quiet gloom 
of the lonely old church and watched the dim lamps 
twinkle above the altar, while all that was mortal of 
Andre Gessonex was being carried mournfully back to 
his miserable attic by the capricious, weeping, laughing, 
frivolous crowds of Paris that had let him die, self-slain I 



WOUMIVOOD. 271 



XXVIIL 

A FEW days elapsed, and the rest of the little miserable 
farce of Fame Vv-as played out with all the pomp and cir- 
cumstance of a great tragedy. The wretched attic which 
had served poor Gessonex for both studio and sleeping- 
room was piled so high with wreaths of roses and laurel 
that one could scarcely enter its low door for the abun- 
dance of flowers, — all his debts were paid by voluntary 
contributions from suddenly discovered admirers, and the 
merest unfinished sketch he had left behind him fetched 
fabulous sums. The great picture of the priest in the 
cathedral was found uncurtained, with a paper pinned 
across it bearing these words — 

" Bequeathed to France 
In exchange for a Grave 1 * 

And the fame of it went through all the land, — every- 
body spoke of " Le Pretre " — as it was called, — all the 
newspapers were full of it, — it was borne reverently to the 
Musde du Luxembourg, and there hung in a grand room 
by itself, framed with befitting splendor and festooned 
about with folds of royal purple ; — and people came softly 
in to look at it and to wonder at the terror and pathos of 
its story, — and whispering pity for the painter's fate was 
on the lips of all the fair and fashionable dames of Paris, 
who visited it in crowds and sent garlands of rare value 
to deck its dead creator's coffin. And I, — I looked on, 
sarcastically amused at everything, — and all'I did was to 
visit the blossom-scented garret from time to time to see 
the "" brute,^^ — the strange, uncouth little boy, whom Ges- 
sonex had designated as his " model for the Stone Period,'' 
— and " a production of Absinthe. " This elvish creature 
would not believe his patron was dead, — he could not be 
brought to understand it in any sort of way, — neither could 
be persuaded to touch a morsel of food. Night after night, 



272 



WORMWOOD. 



day after day, he kept watch by the mortal remains of his 
only friend, like a faithful hound, — his whole soul concen- 
trated as it seemed in his large bright eyes which rested 
on the set waxen features of the dead man with a tender- 
ness and patience that was almost awful. At last the 
final hour came, — the time for the funeral, which was to 
be a public one, carried out with all the honors due to 
departed greatness, — and it was then that the poor ^^ brute' ^ 
began to be troublesome. He clung to the coffin with 
more than human strength and tenacity, — and when they 
tried to drag him away, he snarled and bit like a wild cat 
No one knew what to do with him,— and finally a sugges- 
tion was made that he should be gagged, tied with cords, 
and dragged away by force from the chamber of death in 
which the poor child had learned all he knew of life. This 
course was decided upon, and early in the afternoon of 
the day on which it was to be carried out, I went into the 
room and looked at him, conscious of a certain vague pity 
stirring at my heart for his wretched fate. The sunlight 
streamed in, making a wide pattern on the floor, — wreaths 
and cushions of immortelles and garlands of laurel were 
piled about everywhere, — and in the centre of these 
heaped-up floral offerings, the coffin stood, — the lid partly 
off, for the little savage guardian of it would never allow 
it to be actually shut. The face of Gessonex was just 
visible, — it had changed from meagreness to beauty, — a 
great peace was settled and engraved upon it, — and fra- 
grant lilies lay all about his throat and brow, hiding the 
wound in his temple and covering up all disfigurement. 
The boy sat beside the coffin immovable, — watchfully in- 
tent as usual, — apparently waiting for his friend to awake. 
On an impulse I spoke to him, — 

" 2u as faim^ mon efifant ? " 

He looked up. 

" Non I " The reply was faint and sullen, — and he 
kept his head turned away as he spoke. 

I waited a moment, and then went up and laid my 
hand gently on his shoulder. 

" Listen ! " I said slowly, separating my words with 
careful distinctness, for I knew his comprehension of 
language was limited, — " You wait for what will not 
happen. He is not asleep — so he cannot wake. Try 
to understand me, — he is not kere.^* 



WOI^MWOOD. 2'j7, 

The great jewel-like eyes of the child rested on me 
earnestly. 

*' Not here ? " he repeated dully. ** Not here ? " 

"No," I said firmly. "He has gone! Where? Ah, 
— that is difficult ! — but — we believe, not so very far 
away. See ! " — and I moved the flowers a little that 
covered the breast of the corpse, — " This man is pale 
— he is made of marble, — he does not move, he does 
not speak — he does not look at you, — how then can it be 
your friend .'' Surely you can observe for yourself that he 
cares nothing for you, — if it were your friend he would 
smile and speak to you. He is not here, — this white, 
quiet personage is not he I — he is gone ! " 

Some glimmer of my meaning seemed to enter the 
boy's brain, for he suddenly stood up, and an anxious 
look clouded his face. 

" Gone ? " he echoed. " Gone i* — but why should he 
go ? " 

" He was tired ! " I replied, smiling a little. " He 
needed peace and rest. You will find him, I am sure, 
if you look, among the green trees '\.here the birds sing — 
where there are running brooks and flowers, and fresh 
winds to shake the boughs, — where all artists love to 
dwell when they can escape from cities. He has gone, I 
tell you ! — and Paris is making one of its huge mistakes 
as usual. This is not Gessonex, — why do you not go 
after him and find him .? " 

An eager light sparkled in his eyes, — he clenched his 
hands and set his teeth. 

" Ouz^ — out! " he murmured rapidly. "y<!r vais le cher- 
cher — 7no?i Dieu ! mais . . . ou done ? " 

Now was my opportunity, if he would only suffer him- 
self to be persuaded away ! 

" Come with me," I said. " I will take you to him." 

He fixed his gaze upon me, — the half-timorous, half- 
trusting gaze of a wild animal — a look that somehow 
shamed me by its strange steadfastness, so that it was as 
much as I could do to meet it without embarrassment. 
He was a little savage at heart, — and he had the savage's 
instinctive perception of treachery. 

"iVb«./" he muttered resolutely — ''Je vais le elierelier 
seull . . . II n^ est pas iei P ^^ 

And with this query addressed more to himself than 
i8 



ay 4. ~ WORMWOOD. 

to me, he sprang again to the side of the coffin and 
looked in ; — and then for the first time, as it seemed, the 
consciousness of the different aspect of his friend ap- 
peared to strike him. 

" C'est vrai ! " he said amazedly. " II n'est pas ici ! 
ce n'est pas lui ! J'ai perdu le temps ; — je vais le cher- 
cher I — mais, seul ! — seul ! " 

And without another moment's delay he crept past 
me like the strange, stealthy creature he was, and running 
swiftly down the stairs, disappeared. I sat still in the 
room for some time expecting he would return, but he did 
not, — he was gone, heaven only could tell where. A 
little later in the day the men came who were prepared 
to take him captive, — and glad enough they were to find 
him no longer in their way, for no one had much relished 
the idea of a tussle with the wild, devilish-looking little 
creature whose natural ferocity was so declared and so 
untameable ; and all the arrangements for the last obse- 
quies of Andrd Gessonex were now completed without 
any further delay or interruption. As for me, I knew I 
had sent the child into a wilderness of perplexities that 
would never be cleared up, — he would search and search 
for his patron probably till he died of sheer fatigue and 
disappointment, — but what then ? As well die that way as 
any other, — I could not befriend him, — besides, even had 
I wished to do so, the chances were that he would not 
have trusted me. Anyway I saw him no more, — whatever 
his fate I never knew it. 

And so it came about that the funeral of the starved, 
unhappy, half-mad painter of " Le Pretre " was the finest 
thing that had been seen in Paris for many a long day ! 
Such pomp and solemnity, — such prancing of black steeds 
— such glare of blessed candles — such odorous cars of 
flowers! Once upon a time a suicide was not entitled to 
any religious rites of burial, — but we, with our glorious 
Republic which keeps such a strong coercing hand on the 
priests and will hear as little of God as may be, — we have 
changed all that ! We do as seemeth good unto ourselves, 
and we do not despise a man for having sent himself out 
of the world, — on the contrary we rather admire his spirit. 
It is a sort of defiance of the Divine, — and as such, meets 
with our ready sympathy ! And I smiled as I saw the 
mortal remains of my absinthe-drinking friend carried to 



WORMWOOD. 275 

the last long rest ; — I thought of his own fantastic dreams 
as to what his final end should be. "The Raphael of 
France ! " — so he had imagined he would be called, when 
he had, in his incoherent, yet picturesque style, described 
to me his own fancied funeral. Well ! — so far he had 
been a fairly accurate seer ; — and in leaping the boundary- 
line of life he had caught Fame like a shooting-star and 
turned into a torch to shed strange brilliancy on his grave. 
All was well with him, — he had not missed glory in death 
though he had lacked food in life ! All was well with 
him ! — he had received the best possible transformation 
of his being, — his genius was everything, and he was 
nothing! I watched his solemn obsequies to their end, 
— I heard one of the most famous orators of France 
proclaim his praise over the yawning tomb in which 
they laid him down — and when all was done, I, with 
every one else, departed from the scene. But some hours 
later, — after the earth had been piled above him, — ■ 
I returned to Pere-la-Chaise and sat by the just-covered 
grave alone. I remembered he had said he liked white 
violets, — and I had yielded to a foolish sentiment and had 
bought a small garland of them. I laid them on the cold 
and fresh-turned soil, — their scent sweetened the air — and 
I rested quietly for a few moments, thinking. My mind 
had been clearer since the last one or two days, — my 
faculties instead of being dulled, were more than usually 
acute, — painfully so at times, — for every nerve in my 
body would throb and quiver at the mere passage of an idea 
through my brain. I looked up at the sky, — it was a 
dappled gray color, flecked here and there with gold, — 
for the setting of the sun was nigh, — then I looked again 
at the white violets that lay, fragrant and pure, on the top 
of all the other wreaths of laurel and myrtle that covered 
Gessonex's grave. There was to be a fair monument 
raised above it, so the people said, — ^but I doubted it ! 
Dore's last resting-place remains unmarked to this day ! 
My countrymen promise much more than they perform, 
— it is charming " politesse " on their part, so we do not 
call it lying ! 

Presently my eyes begain to wander round and about 
the cemetery which is beautiful in its way, — a veritable 
City of the Dead, where no rough rumors stir the air, — 
and by-and-bye I caught sight of the name " De Char- 



276 WORMWOOD. 

milles " carved on the marble portal of a tomb not very 
far distant. I realized that I was close to the funeral- 
vault of the once proud family Pauline (not I !) had dis- 
graced and ruined, — and acting on a sudden instinct 
"which I could not explain to myself, I rose and went to- 
wards it. It was built in the shape of a small chapel, as 
many of these tombs are, — it had stained glass windows 
and armorial bearings, and a pair of sculptured angels 
guarded it with uplifted crosses and drooping wings. 
But there was a figure in front of it kneeling at the closed 
door that was no angel, — but merely a woman. She was 
slight, and clad in poorest garments, — the evening wind 
blew her thin shawl about her like a gossamer sail, — but 
the glimmer of the late sunlight glistened on a tress of 
nut-brown hair that had escaped from its coils and fell 
loosely over her shoulders, — and my heart beat thickly 
as I looked, — I knew — I felt that woman was Pauline ! 
Now, should I speak to her, or should I wait, — wait till 
those open-air devotions of hers were done, and then fol- 
low her stealthily and track her out to whatever home she 
had found in the wilderness of the city ? I pondered a 
moment and decided on the latter course, — then, crouch- 
ing behind one of the gravestones hard by, I watched her 
and kept still. How long she knelt there ! — and what 
patience women have ! They never seem to tire of ask- 
ing favors of the God who never hears, — or if He does 
hear, never answers ! It must be dull work, — and yet 
they do it ! The sun went down — the breeze blew more 
coldly,— and at last, with a long sigh that was half a 
moan, a sound that came shuddering forlornly to me where 
I was in hiding, she rose, and with slow, rather faltering 
tread went on her way out of the cemetery. I followed, 
walking on the grass that my footsteps might not be 
heard. Once she turned round, — I saw her face, and 
seeing it, recoiled. For it was still so wondrously fair 
and child-like, though ravaged by grief and made pallid 
by want and anxiety, — it was still the face that had cap- 
tivated my soul and made me mad ! — though I had now 
discarded that form of madness for another more lasting! 
Out into the public thoroughfare we passed, she and I, 
one following the other, — and for more than half an hour 
I kept her in sight, closely tracking the movement of her 
slender figure as it glided through the throng of street- 



JVOA'MWOOP K-jy 

passengers, — then, — all suddenly I ' jst her ! With a mut- 
tered curse, I stood still, searching about me eagerly on 
all sides, — but vainly, — she was gone! Was s/te a phan- 
tom too, like Silvion Guidbl ? What a fool I had been 
not to at once attack her with a rough speech while she 
was kneeling at her father's grave ! It was no sentiment 
of pity that had held me back from so doing, — why had I 
let her go ? Heartily enraged at my own stupidity, I 
sauntered discontentedly homeward. I had changed resi- 
dence of late, — for my money was not inexhaustible, — 
and as I had refused the additional funds 1 might have 
had by right at my father's hands, it was well 1 had al- 
ready decided to exercise economy. I had taken a couple 
of small rooms, decent and tidy enough in their way, in a 
clean and fairly respectable house, — that is, respectable 
for the poorer quarters of Paris, — it is only recently that 
I have come to the den where I live now. But that is 
the humor of absinthe ! — it leads one down in the social 
scale so gently, step by step, — so insidiously, — so care- 
fully — that one cannot see the er^d. And even for me, 
the end is not yet 1 



278 WOUMiVOOD, 



XXIX. 

In the thickest part of the woods of Boulogne it is easy 
to fancy one's self miles away from Paris, — the landscape 
is gently pleasing and pastoral, and to the eyes that are 
unsatiated with grander scenery, it will assuredly seem 
beautiful. I found myself there one morning about an 
hour before noon, — I had taken a sudden fancy to see the 
green trees, to inhale the odor of the pines, and to watch 
the light breath of the wind sweep over the grass, ruffling 
it softly, just as water is ruffled into varying ripples of 
delicate grays and greens. I avoided those avenues 
where the pretty young girls of Paris may be seen with 
their gouveniantes, willing demurely along with downcast 
eyes and that affectation of perfect innocence which does 
so charm and subdue the spirits of men until, — well ! — 
until they find it is all put on for show, to ensnare them 
into the marriage-market ! I strolled into bosky dells, 
rendered sweeter by the luxury of solitude, — I, though I 
had the stain of murder on my soul, for once felt almost 
at peace ! I wandered about dreamily and listlessly, — 
the absinthetir has his occasional phases of tranquillity 
like other people, — tranquillity that is as strange and as 
overpowering as a sudden swoon, — in which the tired 
senses rest, and the brain is for the nonce empty of all 
images and impressions. And so I was scarcely startled 
when, pushing aside the boughs that screened a mossy 
turn in the pathway, I came upon what at first seemed 
like the picture of a .woman reading, — till at last it re- 
solved itself into substantial fact and form, and I recog- 
nized Hdloise St. Cyr. She sat alone on a little rustic 
bench, — her face and figure were sliglitly turned away 
from me, — she was dressed in black, but she had taken 
oif her hat and placed it beside her, and the sunlight 
flickering through the boughs above her, played fully on 
her glorious gold hair, Iler head was bent attentively 



WORMWOOD. 279 

over the book she held, — her attitude was full of graceful 
ease and unstudied repose, — auJ as I watched her from a 
little distance, a sense of sudden awe and fear stole over 
me, — I trembled in every limb. A good girl, mark you I 
— a brave, sweet, pure-minded woman is the most terrific 
reproach that exists on earth to the evil-doer and wicked 
man. It is as though the deaf blind God suddenly made 
Himself manifest, — as though He not only heard and 
saw, but with His voice nundered loud accusation ! 
Many of us, — I speak of men, — cling to bad women, and 
give them our ungrudging admiration — and why ? Be- 
cause they help us to be vile ! — because they laugh at our 
vices and foster them, — and we love them for that ! But 
good women ! — I tell you that such are often left loveless 
and alone, because they will not degrade themselves to 
our brute-level. We want toys, — not angels ! — puppets, 
not queens ! But all the same, when the angel or the 
queen passes us by with the serene scorn of our base 
passions written in her clear calm eyes, we shrink and 
are ashamed, — aye ! if only for a moment's space ! 

And she, — HeloTse, — sat there before me, unconscious 
of my presence — unconscious that the pure air about her 
was tainted by the unquiet breathing of a murderer and 
coward ! For I knew myself to be both these things, — 
absinthe had given me the spirit of braggardism, but had 
deprived me of all true courage. Boastfulness is not 
valor, — yet it often passes for such in France. Poor 
France, — fair France, — dear France ! — there are some of 
her sons still left who would give their life blood to see 
her rise up in her old glory, and be again what she once 
was — a queen of nations. But alas ! — it is not because 
of the German conquest, — nor because she has had fool- 
ish rulers, that she has fallen and is still falling, — it is be- 
cause the new morals and opinions of the age, pro- 
pounded and accepted by narrow-minded, superficial, and 
materialistic thinkers, breed in her a nest of vipers and 
scorpions instead of men; and your ordinary modern 
Frenchman has too low an estimate of all high ideals to 
risk his life in fighting for any one of them. There are 
exceptions to the rule certain!}', — there are always excep- 
tions ; — but they are rare ; — so rare, that we have let all 
Europe know there is no really strong, wise ruling brain 
in France, any more than there is in England. One 



a8o tVORMWOOD. 

would no more accept M. Carnot as a representative of 
the French national intellect, than one would accept Mr. 
Gladstone and his contradictions as a representative of 
English stability. 

The wind rustled the boughs, — a bird sang softly among 
the upper cool bunches of leaves, — and I stood, screened 
by the foliage, nervously hesitating and looking at Kdloise, 
the sweetest and best woman I had ever known. Always 
fond of reading she was ! — and my restless mind flew off 
to a hazy consideration of what her book might possibly 
be. One might safely conclude it was not by Zola, — the 
literary scavenger of Paris would have no charm for that 
high-souled, proudly-delicate Normandy-bred maiden. 
Probably it was one of her favorite classics,^ — or a volume 
of poems, — she was a great lover of poesy. I heard her 
sigh, — a deep fluttering sigh that mingled itself with the 
low-whispering wind, — she suddenly closed her book, — 
and raising her eyes, looked out on the quiet landscape, 
— away from me. My heart beat fast, — but I resolved to 
speak to her, — and with a hasty movement I thrust aside 
the intervening boughs. 

" Heloise ! " 

She started, — what a pale, amazed, scared face she 
turned upon me ! Did she not know me .-* 

" He'loise ! " I said again. 

She rose nervously from her seat, and glanced about 
her from right to left, apparently searching for some way 
of escape, — it was evident she took me for some drunken 
or impertinent stranger. I had forgotten how changed I 
was, — I had forgotten that I looked more like a tramp 
than a gentleman ! I laughed a little confusedly, and 
lifted my hat. 

" You do not seem to recognize me, Heloise ! " I said 
carelessly. " Yet Gaston Beauvais was once no stranger 
to you ! " 

Oh, what a wondering, piteous look she gave me ! — 
what a speechless sorrow swam suddenly into the large, 
lovely gray eyes ! 

" Gaston Beauvais ! " she faltered — " oh no ; — not 
possible ! You, — you — Gaston .'' Oh no ! — no ! " 

And covering her face with her two fair white hands, 
she broke into sudden weeping ! . . . My God ! — it would 
have been well if I could have killed myself then I For 



WORMWOOD. 281 

my heart was touched ; — my hard, hard heart that I 
thought had turned to stone ! Her tears, the sincere out- 
flow of a pure woman's womanly grief, fell like dew on my 
burnt and callous soul, and for a moment 1 was stricken 
dumb with an aching remorse — remorse that I should have 
voluntarily placed such a chasm of eternal separation 
between all good things and the accursed Me that now 
seemed to usurp Creation rather than belong to it. I felt 
a choking sensation in my throat, — my lips grew parched ; 
— I strove to speak once or twice but failed, — and she, — 
she, poor child, wept on. Presently, making an effort to 
conquer myself, I ventured to approach her a step or two 
more nearly. 

" Hdloise ! Mademoiselle St. Cyr ! " — I said unsteadily 
— " Pray — pray do not distress yourself like this ! I was 
foolish to have spoken to you — you were not prepared to 
see me ; — I have startled, — alarmed you ! — I am much 
altered in my looks, I know, — but I forgot, — pray forgive 
me!" 

She checked her sobs, — and uncovering her tear-wet 
eyes, turned their humid lustre full upon me. I shrank 
a little backward, — but she stretched out her trembling 
hands. 

" It is really you, M. Gaston .? " she murmured nerv- 
ously, " Oh, have you been very ill ? You look so 
strange and pale ! — 3^cnj have greatly changed ! " 

" Yes, for the worse ! — I know that ! " I interrupted 
her quietly. " You could scarcely expect me to improve, 
could you, Heloise 1 Nay, did you not yourself curse me, 
not so very long ago ? — and are you surprised to find the 
curse fulfilled .? " 

She sank on the rustic bench she had just quitted and 
regarded me with an affrighted look. 

*' I cursed you ? " she echoed — " I .? — oh yes, yes ! I re- 
member — I was wicked — on that dreadful day of Pauline's 
disgrace and ruin, I said hard things to you — I know ! — 
I was full of pain and anger, — but, believe me, that very 
night I prayed for you ! — indeed I have prayed for you 
always — for you and my lost Pauline ! " 

The tenderness her ^^resence had aroused in me, froze 
suddenly into chill cynicism. 

" Pardieu ! Women are curious creatures ! " I said, 
with a bitter laugh. " They curse a man at noon-day, — 



282 WORMWOOD. 

and pray for him at midnight ! That is droll ! But be- 
ware how you couple perjured lovers' names together, even 
in prayer, mademoiselle — your God, if He be consistent 
can scarcely care to attend to such a petition, — as an in- 
stance, you see how He has taken care of me /'* 

Her head drooped ; — a shudder ran through her frame, 
but she was silent. 

" Look at me ! " I went on recklessly. " Look ! Why, 
you would not have known me if I had not declared myself ! 
You remember Gaston Beauvais ? — what a dandy he was, 
— how spruce and smart and even fastidious in dress i* — a 
silly young fool for his pains ! — you remember how he 
never took much thought about anything, except to make 
sure that he did his work conscientiously, ran into no 
debts, acted honorably to all men and stood well with the 
world. He was the stupidest creature extant ; he believed 
in the possibility of happiness ! — he loved, and fancied 
himself beloved ! He was duped and deceived, — all such 
trusting noodles are ! — and he took his whipping and 
scourging at the hands of Fate rather badly. But he 
learnt wisdom at last, — the wisdom of the wisest ! — he 
found out that men were sots and knaves, and women 
coquettes and wantons, and he resolved to make the best 
of an eternally bad business and please himself since he 
could please nobody else. And he has succeeded ! — here 
he is ! — here / am to answer for the truth of his success ! 
I am very happy ! — one does not want a new coat to be 
contented. I have heard say that a woman always judges 
a man by his clothes,— but if you judge me by mine you 
will do wrongly. Thr,y are shabby, I admit — but I am at 
ease in them, and they serve me better than a court suit 
serves a lacquey. I look ill you tell me, — but I am not 
ill ; — the face is always a tell-tale in matters of dissi- 
pation, — and I do not deny that X am dissipated," — here 
1 laughed harshly as I met her grieved and wondering 
gaze, — " I live a fust liie, — I consort with evil men and 
evil women, — that is, people who do not, like the hypocrit- 
ical higher classes of society, waste valuable time in 
pretending to be good. I am a gamester, — an idler — a 
faineant of the P.iris cafes^ — I have taken my life in my 
own hands and torn it up piecemeal for any dog to devour, 
— and, to conclude, I am an absifitheur^ by which term, if 
you understand it at all, you will obtain the whole clue tQ 



WOKAf^VOOD. 283 

the mystery ol my present existence Absinthe-drink- 
ing is a sort of profession as well as amusement in Paris, 
— it is followed by many men both small and great, — > 
men of distinction, as well as nobodies, — I am in excellent 
company, I assure you ! — and, upon my word, when I 
think of my past silly efforts to keep in a straight line of 
law with our jaded system of morals and behavior, and 
compare it with my present freedom from all restraint 
and responsibility, I have nothing — positively nothing to 
regret ! " 

During this tirade, the fair woman's face beside me 
had grown paler and paler, — her lips were firmly pressed 
together, — her eyes cast down. When I had finished, I 
waited, expecting to hear some passionate burst of re- 
reproach from her, but none came. She took up her 
book, methodically marked the place in it where she had 
left off reading, — put on her hat, (though I noticed her 
hands trembled) and then rising, she said simply — 

'' Adieu f' 

I stared at her amazed. 

" Adieu I •' I echoed — " What do you mean ? Do you 
think I can let you go without more words than these 
after so many weeks of separation ? It was in June I 
last saw you, — and it is now close upon the end of Sep- 
tember, — and what a host of tragedies have been en- 
acted since then ! Tragedies ! — aye ! — murders and sui- 
cides ! " — and Vv'ith an involuntary gesture of appeal I 
stretched out my hand, — " Do not go, Heloise — not yet ! 
I want to speak to you ! — I want to ask you a thousand 
things ! " 

" Why t " she queried in a mechanical sort of way — 
" you say you have nothing to regret ! " 

I stood mute. Her eyes now rested on me steadfastly 
enough, yet with a strained piteousness in them that dis- 
turbed me greatly. 

" You have nothing to regret," — she repeated list- 
lessly — " Old days are over for you — as they are for me ! 
In the space of a few months, the best, the happiest part 
of our lives has ended. Only " — and she caught her 
breath hard — " before I go — I will say one thing — it is 
that I am sorry I cursed you or seemed to curse you. It 
was wrong, — though indeed it is not I that would have 
driven you to spoil your life as you yourself have spoiled 



284 WORMWOOD. 

it. I know you suffered bitterly — but I had hoped you 
were man enough to overcome that suffering and make 
yourself master of it. I knew you were deceived — but I 
had thought you generous enough to have pardoned de- 
ceit. You seemed to me a brave and gallant gentleman, 
— I was not prepared to find your nature weak and — and 
cowardly ! " 

She hesitated before the last word, — but, as she uttered 
it, I smiled. 

" True, quite true, Heloise ! " I said quietly — " I am a 
coward ! I glory in it ! The brave are those that run all 
sorts of dangerous risks for the sake of others, — or for a 
cause, the successful results of which they personally 
will not be permitted to share. I avoid all this trouble ! 
I am ' coward ' enough to- wish comfort and safety for 
myself, — I leave the question of Hoiior to the arguing 
tongues and clashing swords of those who care about it, 
—I do not ! " 

She looked at me indignantly, and her large eyes 
flashed. 

" Oh God ! " she cried. " Is it possible you can have 
fallen so low 1 Was not your cruel vengeance sufficient ? 
You drove Pauline from her home, — her disgrace wnich 
you so publicly proclaimed killed, as you know, my uncle 
her father, — evil and misfortune have been sown broadcast 
by that one malicious act of yours, — even the wretched 
Silvion Guidel has disappeared mysteriously — no trace of 
him can be found, — and not content with this havoc, you 
ruin yourself ! And all for what ? For a child's broken 
troth-plight ! — a child who, as I told you at first, was too 
young to know her own mind, and who simply accepted 
you as her affianced husband, because she thought it 
would please her parents, — no more ! She had then no 
idea, no conception of love ; — and when it came, she fell 
a victim to it — it was too strong for her slight resistance. 
I warned you as well as I could, — I foresaw it all, — I 
dreaded it — for no woman as young and impressionable as 
Pauline could have been long in Silvion Guid^l's com- 
pany without being powerfully attracted. I warned you, — 
but you would see nothing — men are so blind ! They 
cannot — they will not understand that in every woman's 
heart there is the hunger of love — a hunger which must 
be appeased. When you first met Pauline she had nevej 



WORMWOOD. 285 

known this feeling, — and you never roused it in her, — 
but it woke at the mere glance, the mere voice of Silvion 
Guidel. These things 7oi// happen — they are always 
happening, — one is powerless to prevent them. If one 
could always love where love is advisable ! — but one can- 
not do so ! Pauline's sin was no more than that of hun- 
dreds of other women who not only win the world's pardon, 
but also the exoneration of the sternest judges, — and yet 
I am sure she has suffered with a sharper intensity than 
many less innocent ! But you — you have nothing to regret, 
you say — no ! — not though two homes lie wasted and de- 
serted by your pitilessness ! — and, now you have ravaged 
your own life too — you might have spared that — yes, you 
might have spared that, — you might have left that — to 
God 1 " 

Her breast heaved, and a wave of color rushed to her 
cheeks and as quickly receded, — she pressed one hand on 
her heart. 

" You need not " — she went on pathetically — " have 
given me cause to-day to even imagine that perhaps my 
foolish curse did harm to you. It is a vague reproach 
that I shall think of often ! And yet I know I spoke in 
haste only — and without any malicious intent, — I could 
not," — here her voice sank lower and lower — " I could 
not have truly cursed what I once loved ! " 

My heart gave a fierce bound, — and then almost stood 
still. Loved ! What she once loved / Had she, then, 
loved me ? — Certes, a glimmering guess^ — a sort of in- 
stinctive feeling that she ;;??^/z/ have loved me, had stolen 
over me now and then during my courtship of her cousin 
Pauline, — but that she had really bestowed any of her 
affection on me unasked, was an idea that had never 
positively occurred to my mind. And now ? . . . We 
looked at each other, — she with a strange pale light on 
her face such as I had never seen there, — I amazed, yet 
conscious of immense, irreparable loss, — loss which those 
words of hers — " what I once loved " made absolute 
and eternal ! Both vaguely conscience-smitten, we gazed 
into one another's eyes — even so might two spirits, one on 
the gold edge of Heaven, the other on the red. brink of 
Hell, and all Chaos between them, gaze wistfully and 
wonder at their own froward fate, — aye ! — and such, if 
such there be, may lean far out from either sphere, stretch 



286 WORMWOOD. 

hands, waft kisses, smile, weep, cry aloud each other's 
names, — and yet no bridge shall ever span the dark 
division, — no ray of light connect those self-severed souls ! 

" Heloise ! " I stammered, — and then, my voice failing 
me, I was silent. 

She, moving restlessly where she sat on the rustic seat 
with the shadows of the green leaves flickering over her, 
entwined her white hands one within the other, and lifted 
her large solemn eyes towards the deep blue sky. 

" There is no shame in it now " — she said, in hushed 
serious accents. " There is never any shame in what is 
dead. The darkest sin, — the worst crime — is expiated by 
death, — and so my love, being perished, is no longer blame- 
able. I have not seen you for a long time — and perhaps 
I shall never see you again, — one tells many lies in life, 
and one seldom has the chance of speaking the truth, — 
but I feel that I must speak it now . I loved you ! — you 
see how calmly I can say it — how dispassionately — 
because it is past. The old heart-ache troubles me no 
longer, — -and I am not afraid of you any more. But 
before, — I used to be afraid, — I used to think you must be 
able to guess my secret and that you despised me for it. 
You loved Pauline, — she was much worthier love than I, 
— and I should have been quite contented and at rest had 
I felt certain that she loved you in return. But I never 
was certain ; I felt that her affection was merely that of a 
playful child for an elder brother, — I felt sure that she 
knew nothing of love, — love such as you had for her — or — 
as I had for you. But you — you saw nothing " 

She stopped abruptly, for I suddenly flung myself down 
on the seat beside her, and now caught her hands in 
mine. 

" Nothing — nothing ! " I muttered wildly. " We men 
never do see anything ! We are bats, — moths ! — flying 
desperately into all sorts of light and fire and getting 
burnt and withered up for our pains ! Heloise ! Heloise ! 
— Yoti loved me, you say — yoiz ? — Why, just for the merest 
hair's-breadth of mercy extended to us, I might have 
loved you ! — we might have been happy ! Why do you 
pray to God, H(51oise .'' — how can you pray to Him .? 
Seeing you, knowing you, hearing you, why did He not 
save me by your grace as by an angel's intervention ? 
He could have done so had He willed it ! — and I should 



WORMWOOD. 287 

have believed in him then \ And you — why did you not 
give me one look — one word ! — why did you not employ all 
the thousand charms of your loveliness to attract me ? — 
"why were you always so silent and cold ? — was that your 
mode of defence against yourself and me, child ? Oh, my 
God ! — what a waste and havoc of life there is in the 
■world ! Listen — there are plenty of women who by a 
thousand coquetteries and unmistakable signs, give us 
men plainly to understand what they mean, — and we 
are only too ready to obey their signals — but you — you, 
because you are good and innocent, must needs shut up 
your soul in a prison of ice for the sake of — what ? Con- 
ventionality, — social usage ! A curse on conventionality! 
H^loise — Heloise ! — if I had only known ! — if I could 
have guessed that I might have sought your love and 
found it ! — but now ! — why have you told me now^ you beau- 
tiful, fond, foolish woman, when it is too late ! " 

I was breathless with the strange excitement that had 
seized me, — though I held myself as much as I could in 
strong restraint, fearing to alann her by my vehemence, — 
but my whole soul was so suddenly overpowered by the 
extent of the desolation I myself had wrought, that I 
could not check the torrent of words that broke from my 
lips. It maddened me to realize, as I did, that we two 
had always been on the verge of love unknowingly, — and 
yet, by reason of something in ourselves that refused to 
yield to the attraction of each other's presence, and some- 
thing in the whim of chance and circumstance, we had 
wilfully let love go beyond all possible recall ! And she, 
— oh, she was cold and calm, — or if she were not, she had 
the nerve to seem so, — all your delicately-strung student 
women are like that ; so full of fine philosophies that they 
are scarcely conscious of a heart ! Her face was quite 
colorless, — she looked like an exquisitely wrought figure 
of marble, — her hand lay passively in mine, chill as a 
frozen snowflake. 

" Why " — I repeated half savagely — " why have you 
told me all this now, when it is too late ? " 

Her lips trembled apart, — but for a moment no sound 
issued from them. Then with a slight effort she answered 
me. 

" It is just because it is too late that I have told you, 
^t is because my love is dead, that I have chosen you 



288 wormwood: 

should know that it once lived. If there were the small- 
est pulse of life stirring in it now, you should never have 
known." 

And she withdrew her hand from my clasp as she 
spoke. 

" You are a strange woman, Heloise ! " I said involun 
tarily. 

" Possibly I may be," she replied, with a sudden quiver 
of passion in her voice that added richness to its liquid 
thrill. " And yet again, perhaps not as strange as you 
imagine. There are many women who can love without 
blazoning their love to the world, — there are many too 
who will die for love and give no sign of suffering. But we 
need speak no more of this. I only wished to prove to 
you how impossible it was that I could even seriously and 
maliciously have wished you ill, — and to ask you, for the 
sake of the past, to refrain from perpetrating fresh injuries 
on your life and soul. Surely, however much a man has 
been wronged by others, he need not wrong himself ! " 

" If his life were of any value to any one in the world 
he need not and he would not," I responded. " But when 
it is a complete matter of indifference to everybody 
whether he lives or dies — que voulez-vous? I tell you, 
Heloise, I have gone too far for remedy, — even if you 
loved me now, which you do not, you could not raise me 
from the depths into which I have fallen, and where I am 
perfectly contented to remain." 

Her eyes flashed with mingled indignation and sorrow. 

" I thank God my love for you has perished then ! " 
she exclaimed passionately. " For had I still loved you, 
it would have killed me to see you degraded as you are 
to-day ! " 

I smiled a little contemptuously. 

" Chere Heloise, do not talk of degradation ! " I mur- 
mured. " Or if we must talk of it, — let us consider the 
fate of — Pauline ! " 

She started, as though I had stabbed her with a dagger's 
point. 

" Have you seen her 1 Do you know where she is ? " 
she demanded eagerly. 

" Yes — and no," I replied. " I have seen her twice, — 
but I have not spoken to her, nor do I know where she 
lives, I saw her, the first time, wandering shabbily clad. 



IVOKAfWOOD. 289 

in the back streets of Paris " — Hdloise uttered a faint cry 
and tears sprang:; into her eyes, — "and when I beheld her 
for the second lime, slie was kneelinj:^ outside her father's 
grave at Pbre-la-Chaise. But I intend to track her out ; 
— I will find her, wherever she is ! " 

Oh, what a happy hopeful light swept over the fair pale 
face beside me ! 

" You tvi/l " she cried. " You will find her ? — you 
will restore her to her mother ? — to me ? — the poor poor 
unhappy child ? Ah, Gaston ! — if you do this, you will 
surely make your peace with God ! " 

I shrugged my shoulders. 

" Ma c/tcre, there is time enough for that ! Monsieur 
ie boJi Dieu and I have not quarrelled that I am aware of, 
■ — and if we had, we should perhaps not be very anxious 
to renew our friendship! I would rather make my 
peace with you. If I find Pauline, will you love me 
again ? " 

She gave a faint exclamation and recoiled from me as 
though afraid. 

" Oh no ! — never — never ! " she said shudderingly. 
" Never ! What power can revive a perished passion, 
Gaston Beauvais .'* Once dead — it is dead forever. You 
are to me the merest phantom of the man I once adored 
in secret, — I could no more love you now than I could 
love a corpse long buried 1 " 

She spoke with vehemence and fervor, — and every 
pulse in my body seemed to rebound with a smarting 
sense of anger against her. I felt that though she had as 
she said, once loved me, she now regarded me with some- 
thing near positive aversion, though that aversion was 
mingled with a pity which I scorned. She was unjust, — 
all women are ! The subtle nerves of her feminine organ- 
ization had been wrenched and twisted awry by disap- 
pointed passion quite as much as mine had, — and I could 
read and analyze her emotion — I saw she instinctively 
despised herself for ever having bestowed a single tender 
thought on such a piece of unworthiness as I ! No mat- 
ter ! — I would meet her on her own ground ! — if she could 
not love me, she should fear me ! 

"J/t-m, che)'e et belle amief' I said satirically. "We 
have — for no reason that I can see — played a veritable 
game of cat and mouse together. You have caught me 



29© WORMWOOD. 

^ 

in your pearly claws — and you have purred prettily concern- 
ing your past affection for me, — and now you settle on me 
tooth and nail, and tear me into shreds of hopelessness 
and despair. Soit ! It is the way of women, — I do not 
complain. I shall, as I told you, seek out Pauline, — but 
if I find her, do not imagine I shall restore her to your 
arms ! Fas si bete ! I shall keep her for myself. I would 
not have her for my wife — no ! — but there is no earthly 
objection to my taking her as my mistress ! The idea will 
not shock or shame her — now /'^ 

With one swift movement Heloi'se sprang up and faced 
me — her whole figure trembling v^ith suppressed emotion. 

" Oh God ! You would not be so base ! " she cried. 
" You could not — you dare not ! "' 

I rose in my turn and confronted her calmly. 

" How inconsistent you are, Heloise ! " I said indolently. 
" Base ! I see nothinf; base in such a proposal to such a 
woman as your too-much-lcved young cousin ! She has 
of her own free-will descended several steps of the ladder 
of perdition — no force will be needed to persuade her 
down to the end ! You overrate the case " 

*' I tell you you shall not harm her ! " exclaimed Heloi'sCj 
with a sudden fierceness of grief and passion. " I too 
have searched for her and I will search for her still, — 
more ardently now that I know she must be defended 
ix om. you I Oh, I will be near you when you least think 
it ! — I will track jj'^z/, I will ioWo^^ you ! — I will do anything 
to save her from the additional vileness of your touch ! — 
your " 

She paused, breathless. 

I smiled. 

"Do not be melodramatic, ma chere !" \ murmurec 
coldly. " It suits you, — you look admirably lovely in 
anger — but still — we are in the Bois, — and there may be 
listeners. I shall be charmed if you will follow me and 
track me out, as you say — but, — you will find it difficult ! 
You cannot save what is hopelessly lost, — and for 
' daring ' ! — Dieu / how little you know me ! — there is noth- 
ing I dare not do, — nothing, save one thing ! " 

She stood still, — her eyes dilated, — her breath coming 
and going quickly, her hands clenched, — but she said not 
a word. 

* You do not ask what that one thing is," I went op. 



WORMIVOOD. 991 

keeping my gaze upon her. " But I will tell you. The 
limit of my courage — such as it is, — stops with you. I 
dare not, — mark me well ! — I dare not affront you, — so 
that, however much my heart may ache and hunger for 
love, I dare not love you ! You are the one sacred thing 
on earth to me, and so you will remain — for I have volun- 
tarily resigned home and kindred — my father has dis- 
owned me, as completely as I have disowned him — and 
only the memory of your beauty will cling to me hence- 
forth, as something just a little less valuable and sweet 
than — Absinthe.''^ 

I laughed, and she surveyed me amazedly. 

" Than absinthe ! " she repeated mechanically. " I do 
not understand " 

"No, I suppose you do not," I went on quietly, "you 
will probably never understand how absinthe can become 
dearer to a man than his own life I It is very strange I — 
but in Paris, very true. You have been in dangerous 
company, Heloise, to-day ! — be thankful you have escaped 
all harm ! You have talked of past love and passion to a 
man who has fire in his veins instead of blood, — and who, 
had he once let slip the leash of difficult self-control might 
have thought little of taking his fill of kisses from your 
lips, and killing you afterwards ! Do not look so fright- 
ened, — I dare not touch you, — I dare not even kiss your 
hand ! You are free as angels are, — free to depart from 
me in peace and safety, — with what poor blessing a self- 
ruined man may presume to invoke upon you. But do 
not ask me to consider Pauline as I consider you, — you 
might as easily expect me to pardon Silvion Guid^l I " 

She was silent, — I think from sheer terror this time, — 
and a restless inquisitiveness stirred in me, — an anxiety 
to find out how much she knew concerning the mysteri- 
ous disappearance of that once holy saint of the Church 
whom I had sent to find out in other worlds the causes of 
his creed ! 

" What has become of him, do you think ? " I said sud- 
denly. " Perhaps he is dead? " 

How pale she looked ! — how scared and strange ! 

" Perhaps ! " she murmured half inaudibly. 

" Perhaps " — I went on recklessly, — and laughing as I 
spoke, — "Perhaps he is murdered I Have you ever 
thought of that .'* It is quite possible ! " 



292 



WORMWOOD. 



And at that instant our eyes met ! What ! — was rhy 
crime blazoned in my face ? I could not tell, — I only 
know that she uttered a smothered cry, — an exclamation 
of fear or horror or both, — and with a movement of her 
hands, as though she thrust some hideous object from her, 
she turned and fled ! I saw the sunlight flash on her hair 
like the heavenly halo above the forehead of an angel, — I 
heard the rustle of her dress sweep with a swift shudder- 
ing hiss over the long grass that bent beneath her trend, 
— she was gone ! In her haste she had left behind her 
the book she had been reading, and I took it up mechani 
cally. It was a translation of Plato, — ^it opened of its 
own accord at a passage she had marked. 

" When one is atte77ipting noble things^ it is surely noble 
also to suffer whatever it may befall us to suffer T 

Aye ! — for the grand old Greeks this was truth, — but 
for modern men what does it avail ? Who attempts 
" noble things " nowadays without being deemed half mad 
for his or her effort ? And as for suffering there is surely 
enough of that without going out of one's way in search 
of it ! Good Plato ! — you are not in favor at this period 
of time, — your philosophies are as unacceptable to our 
*' advanced " condition as Christ's Christianity ! So I 
thought ; — but I took the volume with me all the same, — 
it had the signature of " Heloise St. Cyr " — written on its 
fly-leaf in a firm characteristic woman's hand, — and I had 
a superstitious idea that it might act like a talisman to 
shield me from evil. Folly of course ! — for there is no 
talisman on earth or in heaven that can defend a man 
from the baser part of himself. And to that baser part I 
had succumbed, — and I had no repentance — no ! — not 
though I should have sacrificed the love of a thousand 
women as fair and pure-souled as this strange girl Heloi'se 
who had loved me once, and whose love I myself had 
turned into hatred. And yet, — yet — I was more awake to 
the knowledge of my own utter vileness than I had ever 
been before, as with the Plato in my hand, and my hat 
pulle ^ low down over my brows I went slinkingly by side- 
paths icid byeways out of the Bois like the accursed thing 
I was, accursed, and for once, fully conscious of my 
curse ! 



WOiiM^OOJX 393 



XXX. 

Weeks went past ; with me their progress was scarcely 
noticed, for I lived in a sort of wild nightmare of de- 
lirium that could no more be called life than fever is 
called health. I was beginning to learn a few of the 
heavier penalties attached to the passion that absorbed 
me, — and the mere premonitory symptoms of those pen- 
alties were terrifying enough to shake the nerves of many 
a bolder man than I. I drank more and more Absinthe 
to drown my sensations, — sometimes I obtained a stupe- 
fying result with the required relief, but that relief was 
only temporary. The visions that now haunted me were 
more varied and unnatural in character, — yet it was not so 
much of visions I had to complam as impressions. These 
were forcible, singular, and alarmingly realistic. For ex- 
ample, I would be all at once seized by the notion that 
everything about me was of absurdly abnormal propor- 
tions, or the reverse ; men and women would, as I looked 
at them, suddenly assume the appearance of monsters 
both in height and breadth, and again, would reduce 
themselves in the twinkling of an eye to the merest 
pigmies. This happened frequently, — I knew it was only 
an ii]ipressio7i or distortion of the brain-images, but it was 
nevertheless troublesome and confusing. Then there 
were the crowds of persons I saw who were not real, — 
and whom I classed under the head of "visions," — but, 
whereas once there was a certain order and method in 
the manner of their appearance, there was now none, — 
they rushed before me in disorderly masses, with faces 
and gestures that were indescribably hideous and revolt- 
ing. Therefore my chief aim now was to try and deaden 
my brain utterly, — I was tired of the torture and perplexity 
its subtle mechanism caused me to suffer. Meanwhile 
I gained some little distraction by searching everywhere 
for Pauline, — this was the only object apart from Absinthe 



294 



WORMWOOD, 



that interested me in the least. The rest of the world 
was the most tiresome pageantry-show, — sometimes dim 
and indistinct — sometimes lucidly brilliant — but always 
spectral, — alv/ays like a thing set apart from me with 
which I had no connection whatsoever. 

So, imperceptibly to my consciousness, the summer 
faded and died, — and autumn also came to its sumptu- 
ously colored end in a glory of gold and crimson foliage 
which fell to the ground almost before one had time to 
realize its rich beauty. A chill November began, attended 
with pale fog and drizzling rain, — the leaves, lately so gay 
of tint, dropped in dead heaps or drifted mournfully on 
the sweeping wings of the gusty blast, — the little tables 
outside all the cafis were moved within, and the sombre- 
ness of approaching winter began to loom darkly over 
Paris, not that Paris ever cares particularly for threaten- 
ing skies or inclement weather, its bright interior life 
bidding defiance to the dullest day. If you have even a 
very moderate income, just sufficient to rent the tiniest 
maisonette in Paris, you can live more agreeably there per- 
haps than in any other city in the world. You are certain 
to have lively coloring about you — for no little "apparte- 
ment " in Paris but is cheerful with painted floral designs, 
gilding, and mirrors, — if you be a woman your admirers 
will bring you white lilac and orchids in the middle of 
December, arranged with that perfectly fine French taste 
which is unequalled throughout the globe, — and on a 
frosty day your cuisiniere will make you a " boicillofi " such 
as no English cook has any idea of, — while, no matter 
whether you be on the topmost floor of the tallest house, 
you need only look out of window to see some piece of 
merriment or other afoot, — for we Parisians, whatever 
our faults, are merry enough, — and even when, monkey- 
like, we tear some grand ideal to bits and throw it in the 
gutter, we always grin over it ! We dance on graves, — 
we snap our fingers in the face of the criminal who is just 
going to be guillotined — why not ? " Tout casse, tout 
passe ! " — we may as well laugh at the whole Human 
Comedy while we can! Now I, for example, have never 
been in England, — but I have read much about it, and I 
have met many English people, and on the whole I am 
inclined to didvcnrQ ^' per/idc Albion J' Her people are so 
wise in their generation. When your English lord is con- 



WORMWOOD. J95 

scious of having more vices in his composition than thcro 
are d.iys in the year, he builds a churcli and endows a 
hospital — can anything be more excellent ? He becomes 
virtuous at once in the eyes of the world at large, and yet 
he need never resign one of his favorite little peccadilloes 1 
We do fiot manage these things quite so well in France, — 
we are blagucurs — even if we are vicious, fious blaguofis 
la chose! How much better it is to be secretive 
h r Anglaise ! — to appear good no matter how bad we are, — 
to seem as though all the Ten Commandments were 
written on our brows even while we are coveting our 
neighbor's w^ife ! But I digress. I ought to keep to the 
thread of my story, ought I not, dear critics on the 
press ? — you who treat every narrative, true or im- 
aginative, that goes into print, as a gourmet treats 
a quail, leaving nothing on the plate but a fragment 
of picked bone which you present to the public and 
call it a " review ! " Ah mes gar^ons ! — take care ! 
Do not indulge your small private spites and jeal- 
ousies too openly or you may lose your occupation, 
which though it only pay you at the rate of half-a- 
guinea a column, and sometimes less, is still an occupa- 
tion. The Public itself is the Supreme Critic now, — its 
" review " does not appear in print, but nevertheless its 
unwritten verdict declares itself with such an amazing 
weight of influence, that the ephemeral opinions of a few 
ill-paid journalists are the merest straws beating against 
the strong force of a whirlwind. Digression again ? 
Yes ! — what else do you expect of an absintheiir ? I do 
not think I am more discursive than Gladstone of 
Hawarden, or more flighty than Boulanger of Jersey ! 
AlloJis, — I will try to be explicit and tell you how pretty 
schoolgirl Pauline de Charmilles ended her troubles, — but 
I confess I have dallied with the subject purposely. 
Why? Why, because I hate yet rejoice to think of it, — 
because I dwell on it with loving and with loathing, — be- 
cause it makes me laugh with ecstasy — and anon, weep 
and tremble and implore ! — though what I implore, and 
to whom I address any sort of appeal, I cannot explain 
to you. Sometimes cowering on the ground I wail aloud 
- — " Oh God — God ! " half credulous, half despairing,— 
and then when the weak paroxysm is past, and the pitiless 
blank Silence of things hurls itself down on my soul as 



295 WOK M WOOD. 

the crushing answer to my cry, I rise to my feet, calm, 
tearless, and myself again — knowing that there is no 
God ! — none at least that ever replies to the shriek of tort- 
ure or the groan of misery. How strange it is that there 
are some folks who still continue to pray ! 

One cold dark evening, — how minutely I remember 
every small incident connected with it ! — I was wander- 
ing home in my usual desultory fashion, a little more 
heavily drugged than usual, and in a state of sublime in- 
difference to the weather, which was wet and gusty, when 
I heard a woman's voice singing in one of the bye-streets 
down which I generally took my way. There was some- 
thing sweet and liquid in the thrill of the notes as they 
rose upward softly though the mist and rain, — and I 
could hear the words of the song distinctly, — it was a 
well-known convent chant to the " Guardian Angel ; " — . 
these heavenly messengers seem rather idle in the world 
nowadays ! 

*' Viens sur ton aile, Ange fidele 

Prendre mon coeur ! 
[ Cast le plus ardent de mes voeux ;— 
Pres de Marie 
Place-moi bientot dans les cieux I 
O guide aimable, sois favorable 
A mon desir 
Et viens finir 
Ma triste vie 
Avec Marie ! " 

A wavering child-like pathos in the enunciation of the 
last lines struck me with a sense of familiarity ; — involun- 
tarily, I thought of H^loise and of the way she used to 
play the violin, and of the pleasant musical evenings we 
used to pass all together at the house of the De Char- 
milles. I sauntered into the street and down it lazily 
— the woman who sang was standing at the side of the 
curbstone, and there were a few people about her listening ; 
— one or two dropped coins in her timidly outstretched 
hand. As I came close within view of her 1 stopped and 
stared, doubtful for a moment as to her identity, — then, 
in doubt no longer, I sprang to her side. 

'■'■ Pauline / '^ 1 exclaimed. 

She started, and shuddered back from me, her face 
growing paler than ever, her eyes opening wide in wistful 
wonder and fear. The little group that had listened to 



WORMWOOD. 2^7 

her song broke up and dispersed, — they had no particular 
interest in her more than in any other wandering street- 
vocalist, and in less than a minute we were almost alone. 

" Pauline ! " I said again, — then, breaking into a de- 
risive laugh, I went on — "What! — has it come to this? 
— you, the sole daughter of a proud and ancient house, 
singing in the highways and the byeways for bread! 
Dieu ! — one would have thought there were more com- 
fortable ways of earning a living — for you at any rate ! — 
you, with your fair face and knowledge of evil could 
surely have done better than this ! " 

She looked at me steadfastly but made no answer, — 
she was apparently as amazed and stricken at the sight 
of me as her cousin He'loise had been. Meanwhile I 
surveyed her with a swift yet intent scrutiny — I noticed her 
shabby, almost threadbare clothes, — the thin starved look 
of her figure, — the lines of suffering about her mouth and 
eyes, — and yet with all this she was still beautiful, — beau- 
tiful as an angel or fairy over whom the cloud of sorrow 
hangs like blight on a flower. 

" Well ! " I resumed roughly, after waiting in vain for 
her to speak, — " we have met at last, it seems ! I have 
searched for you everywhere — so have your relatives and 
friends. You have kept the secret of your hiding-place 
very well all these months — no doubt for some good 
reason ! Who is your lover 1 " 

Still the same steadfast look, — the same plaintive pa- 
tient uplifting of the eyes ! 

" My lover .? " she echoed after me softly and with sur- 
prise. " If you are, as I suppose you must be, Gaston 
Beauvais, then you know — you have always known his 
name. Whom can I love — who can love me, — if not 
Silvion ? " 

I laughed again. 

" Bien ! You can love the dead then } Nay ! — you 
are too fair to waste your beauty thus ! A corpse can 
give no caresses, — and le beau Silvion by this time is 
something less even than a corpse ! How you stare 1 
Did you not know that he was dead 1 " 

Her face grew gray as ashes, — and rigid in the extrem- 
ity of her fear. 

"Dead!" she gasped. "No — no! That could not 
be! Dead! Silvion.-* No, no! — you are cruel — you 



298 WORMWOOD. 

always were cruel — you are Gaston Beauvais, the cruel- 
lest of all cruel men, and you tell me lies to torture me ! 
You were always glad to torture me ! — yes, even after you 
had loved me ! I never could understand that — for if one 
loves at all, one always forgives. And so I do not believe 
you, — Silvion is not dead, — he could not die — he is too 
young " 

" Oh, little fool ! " — I interrupted her fiercely — " do not 
the young die ? The young, the strong, and the beautiful, 
like your Silvion, are generally the first to go ; — they are 
too good, say the old women, for this wicked world ! Too 
good ! — ha ha ! — the axiom is excellent in the case of 
Silvion Guidel, who was so perfect a saint ! Come here, 
Pauline " — and I seized her hand. " Do not try to resist 
me, or it will be the worse for you ! One look at my 
face will tell you what I have become, — as vile a man as 
you are a woman — scum, both of us, on the streets of 
Paris ! Come with me, I tell you ! Scream or struggle, 
and as sure as these clouds drop rain from heaven I will 
kill you ! I never had much mercy in my disposition — I 
dare say you remember that — I have less than ever now. 
There are many things I must say to you, — things which 
you must hear, — which you shall hear ! — come to some 
remoter place than this, where we shall not be noticed, — 
where no one will interrupt us, or think that we are more 
than two beggars discoursing of the day's gains !" 

And clutching her arm I half dragged, half led her with 
me, — I myself full of a strange rising fury that savored 
of madness, — she almost paralyzed, I think, with sheer 
terror. Out of the street we hurried, — and passed into a 
small obscure side-alley or court, from the corner of which 
could be perceived the shimmer of the Seine and the 
lights on the Pont N€uf. 

" Now ! " I said hoarsely, drawing her by force up so 
near to me that our faces were close together, and our 
eyes, peering into each other's, seemed to ravage out as 
by fire the secrets hidden in our hearts — *' now let us speak 
the truth, you and I, — and since you were always the 
most graceful liar of the two, perhaps you had best begin 1 
Fling off the mask, Pauline de Charmilles I — make open 
confession, and so in part mend the wounds of your soul ! 
— tell me how you have lived all this while and what you 
have been doing.? 1 know your past, — I can imagine 



IVORAflVOOD. 299 

your present !— but — speak out ! Tell me how Paris 
has treated you, —what you 7vt'rg I can remember, — and 
all I want to know now, is what you arf /" 

How strangely quiet she had become ! — this one play- 
ful, childish, coquettish creature I had loved ! She never 
flinched beneath my gaze, — she never tried to draw her 
hands away from mine — her features were colorless, but 
her lips were firmly set, and no tears dimmed the feverish 
lustre of her eyes. 

" What I am ? " she murmured in faint yet clear accents. 
" I am what I have always been, — a poor broken-hearted 
woman who is faithful ! " 

Faithful ! I flung her hands from me in derision, — I 
stared at her, amazed at her effrontery. 

" Faithful," I echoed. " You ! You, who sported with 
a man's heart as though it were a toy, — you, who ruined 
an honest man's life to gratify a selfish guilty passion, — 
you I — you dare to speak of faithfulness — you " 

" Stop ! " she said softly and with perfect composure. 
" I think you do not understand, — it is seldom men can 
understand women. In selfishness, if we speak of that, 
you are surely more to blame than I, — for you think of 
nothing but your ow7i wrong — a wrong for which, God 
knows, I would have made any possible reparation. And 
I repeat it, I am faithful ! You cannot, you dare not call 
the woman false who is true to the memory of the only 
love she ever yielded herself to, body and soul ! She 
who surrenders her life to many lovers — she it is who is 
unfaithful — she it is who is base, — but not such an one as 
I ! For I have had but one passion, — one thought — one 
hope — one thread to bind me to existence, — Silvion ! 
You know, for I told you all the truth, that my love was 
never centred upon 5'Ou, — you know that 1 had never 
wakened to the least comprehension of love till he, 
Silvion, made me see all its glory, all its misery ! — and 
neither he nor I are to blame for our unhappy destiny ! 
Blame Nature, blame Fate, blame God, blame Love itself, 
— the joy, the despair of it all was to be! But faithful- 
ness ! Ah, Gaston Beauvais ! — if ever any woman in the 
world was faithful, / am that woman ! I can keep that 
one poor pride to comfort me when I die ! If, in these 
vt'eary months any other man's hand had touched mine 
with a gesture of affection, — if another man's lips had 



300 WORMWOOD. 

touched mine with the lightest caress — then, — then you 
might have spurned me as a vile and fallen thing — then 
you would have had the right to loathe me as I should 
have loathed myself! But lam as one vowed and con- 
secrated — yes ! consecrated to love, and to love's com- 
panion, sorrow, — and though I have, against my wish and 
will, brought grief to you and many who once were dear 
to me, I am faithful ! — faithful to the one passion of my 
life, and I shall be faithful still until the end ! " 

Oh, quixotic fool ! I thought, as I heard her impas- 
sioned words fall one by one, musically on the careless 
air. Why she might have been a saint for her fearless and 
holy look ! — she of the corrupt heart and wayward will — 
even she,~it was laughable — she might have been a 
saint ! My God ! — for one wild fleeting moment I 
thought her so, — for a comparison between her life and 
mine passed over me and caused me to recoil from her as 
one unworthy to be near so pure a thing ! Pure ? — what ? 
Because she had been true to her betrayer ? Fine purity, 
indeed! — what was I dreaming of? The rain and mist 
were dark about us, — no heavenly aureole shone above 
her brows — she was a mere bedraggled wretch with a w^orn 
face, feigning a wondrous honesty ! Faithful ? Faithful 
to — that bruised and battered thing I had flung out into 
the river with such infinite trouble, — faithful, — to that 
forbidding lump of clay thrown long ago into the common 
grave of nameless suicides ! What a jest ! — what a 
mockery ! I looked at her as she stood before me — as 
frail and slight a woman as ever was born to misery. 

" So ! " And with all this famous fidelity you boast of, 
how have you lived ? " I asked her derisively. 

" I have worked," she replied simply — " and when I 
could get no work, I have sung, as you saw me to-night, 
in the poorer streets, — for the poor are more generous than 
the rich, — and many people have been very good to me. 
And sometimes 1 have starved, — but I have always hoped 
and waited " 

" For what ? " I cried. "Oh, most foolish of all fool- 
ish women, — waited and hoped for what ? " 

" For one glimpse of Silvion I " and she raised her eyes 
with a trustful ligiu in their dark blue depths to the murky 
and discontented heavens. '* I have always felt that 
some day he would come to Paris, — and that I should see 



JVORAflVOOD. 



301 



his face once more ! I would ask him for nothing but a 
word of blcssinp;, — I would not call him from the life he 
has been compelled lo choose, and I would not reproach 
him for choosing it, — I should be quite, quite happy just 
to kiss his hand and let him go — but — I should have seen 
him! Then I would go into some quiet convent of the 

poor and end my days, — 1 would pray for him " 

" Aye ! — as though he were another Abelard ! " I inter- 
rupted her harshly. " Your prayers would probably take 
the form of Colardeau's poesy — " 

" ' Cn Dieu parle h mon c<xur, 
* De ce Dieti, ton rivals sots eticore le vainqueur !* 

We all understand the ulterior meaning of such pretty 
sentiment! What! will you actually swear to me that 
you have lived hidden apart like this to work and starve 
on the mere hope of seeing your lover again, when you 
know that by his own act he separated himself from you 
forever ? " 

She did not speak ; but she made a sign of patient 
assent. 

I burst into laughter, loud, long and irresistible. 

" And they say that God exists 1 " I cried — " a God of 
justice, — who allows His creatures to torment themselves 
with shadows ! Oh, sublime justice ! Listen, listen, you 
child who hold fast to fidelity which nowadays is counted 
as a mere dog's virtue, — listen, and learn from me what a 
spendthrift you have been of your time, and how you 
have wasted your prayers ! Listen — listen ! " and again 
I caught her hands in mine and bent my face downwards 
to hers — " Listen, for I am in the humor to tell you every- 
thing, — everything! You have spoken, — it is my turn to 
speak now. The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but 
the truth, so help me God ! Do you hear that ? That is 
a proper legal oath, — it suffices for a court of justice where 
not a man believes in the God adjured, — it must sufl[ice for 
you who do believe — or so you say I Well then, by that 
oath, and by everything holy and blasphemous in this sacred 
and profane world of ours I swear to you Silvion GuidH 
is dead ! You can think his soul is in heaven if you like, 
— if it consoles you to think, — but wherever his soul is, 
his body is dead, — and it was his fine, fair body you knew, 



302 WORMWOOD, 

— his body you so loved, — you surely will not be such a 
hypocrite as to deny that ! Well that body is dead, — 
dead and turned to hideous corruption ! — Ha ! — you shud- 
der ? — you struggle " — for she was striving to tear her hands 
from my grip. " Perhaps you can guess how he died ? 
Not willingly, I assure you ! — he was not by any means 
glad to go to the paradise whose perfect joys he pro- 
claimed ! No ! — he was a rebellious priest, — he fought 
for every breath of the strong, rich, throbbing life that 
made mere manhood glorious to him, — but he was con- 
quered ! — he gave in at last Silence ! — do not scream 

or I shall kill you ! He is dead, I say !-^stone dead ! 

who should know it better than 1, seeing that I — murdered 
him ! " 



WORMWOOD. 303 



XXXI. 

What fools women are ! To break their hearts is 
sometimes as easy as to break fine glass, — a word will 
do it. A mere word ! — one uttered at random out ot 
the thousands in the dictionary. " J/z/r^tv," for exam- 
ple, — a word of six letters, — it has a ludicrously appall- 
ing effect on human nerves. On the silly Pauline it fell 
like a thunderbolt sped suddenly from the hand of God ; 
— and down she dropped at my feet, white as snow, inert 
as stone. I might have struck her across the brows with 
a heavy hammer or pierced her body with some sharp 
weapon, she lay so stunned and helpless. Tlie sight of 
her figure there, huddled in a motionless heap, made me 
angry, — she looked as though she were dead. I was not 
sorry for her ; no ! — I was sorry for nothing now ; — but I 
lifted her up from the wet pavement in my arms, and held 
her close against my breast in a mechanical endeavor to 
warm her back to consciousness. 

" Poor pretty little toy ! " I thought, as I chafed one 
of her limp cold hands, — and then — hardly knowing 
what I did, I kissed her. Some subtle honey or poison, 
or both, was surely on her lips, for as I touched them I 
grew mad ! What ! — only 07ie kiss for me who had been 
deprived of them so long "i No ! — ten, twenty, a hundred ! 
I rained them down on cheeks, eyes, brow and hair, — 
though I might as well have kissed a corpse, she was sc 
still and cold. But she breathed, — her heart against 
mine, — I could feel its faint pulsations ; and I renewed 
my kisses with the ardor, not of love, but of hatred ! You 
do not think it possible to kiss a woman you hate "i Fair 
lady! — (for it cannot be one of uiy sex that suggests the 
doubt !) you know little of men ! We are, when roused, 
tigers in our loves and hatreds, — and we are quite capa- 
ble of embracing a woman whom we mentally loathe, so 
long as she has physical attraction, — aye 1 — the very fact 



304 



IVOI^MWOOD, 



of our loathing will often redouble the fascination we 
have for her company ! Oh, we are not all lath-and- 
plaster men, with a stereotyped smile and company man- 
ners ! The most seeming-cold of us have strange depths 
of passion in our natures which, if once stirred, leap into 
flame and destroy all that is within our reach. Such fire 
was in me now as my lips almost breathlessly caressed 
the fair face that lay against my heart like a white flov/er, 
— and when at last the dark blue eyes opened and re- 
garded me, first with vague doubt and questioning, then 
with affright and abhorrence, a sense of the fiercest 
triumph was in me, — a triumph which grew hotter with 
every instant, as I reflected that now — now at any rate 
Pauline was in my power — I could make her mine if I 
choose ! — she had been faithful to Silvion living, but she 
should not remain faithful to him dead ! I held her fast 
in my arms with all my strength, — with all my strength ? 
— my strength was as a reed in the wind before the sud- 
den access of superhuman power that rushed upon her as 
she recovered from her swoon ! She broke from my 
clasp, — she pushed me violently from her, and then stood 
irresolute, feebly pressing her hand against her eyes as 
though in an effort to recall her thoughts. 

" Silvion — dead ! " she muttered, — " dead ! — and I 
never knew ! No warning given — no message — no spirit- 
voice in the night to tell me — Oh no ! — God would not be 
so cruel! Dead! — and — murdered/ Ah no!" and her 
accents rose to a shrill wail — " it cannot be true ! — it can- 
not ! Gaston Beauvais, it was not you who spoke — it 
was some horrid fancy of my own ! — you did not say it — 
you could not say \t " 

She stopped, panting for breath. My blood burned as 
I looked at her, — in her agony and terror she was so 
beautiful ! How wild and brilliant were those lovely 
eyes ! — I took a fierce delight in pricking her on to such 
adorable frenzy ! 

" I said, Pauline, what I will say again, that your lover 
Silvion Guidel is dead, and that it was I who killed him I 
Without a weapon, too, — with these hands alone ! — and 
yet see ! — there is no blood upon them ! " 

I held them out to her, — she craned her neck forward 
and looked at them strangely, with a peering horror in 
her eyes that seemed to make them fixed and glassy. 



WORMWOOD. 305 

Then a light flashed over her face — her lips parted in a 
shrill scream. 

" Murderer ! " she cried, clappin;:; her hands wildly, 
— " murderer ! You have confessed — you shall atone ! 
You shall die for your crime — 1 will have justice ! au 
secours ! au secours ! " 

I sprang upon her swiftly — I covered her mouth — I 
grasped her slim throat and stifled her shrieks. 

" Silence, fool ! " I whispered hoarsely. " I told you 
I would kill you if you screamed. Another sound, 
another movement, and I will keep my word. What are 
you shouting for ? — what do you want with justice .^ 
There is no such thing, either in earth or heaven ! Siivion 
Guidel is dead and buried, but who can prove that he 
was murdered ? He was buried as a suicide. If I tell 
you I killed him, I can tell others a different story and 
your denunciation of me will seem mere hysterical raving ! 
Be still ! " Here, as I felt her swaying unsteadily be- 
neath my touch, I took my hands from her mouth and 
throat and let her go. She tottered and sank down on 
the pavement, shuddering in every limb, and crouching 
there, moaned to herself like a sick and suffering child. 
I waited a minute or two, listening. Had any one heard 
her scream ? I half expected some officious gendarme to 
appear, and inquire what was the matter, — but no ! — noth- 
ing disturbed the dark stillness but the roar of passing 
traffic and the plash of the slow rain. Satisfied at last 
that all was safe, I turned to her once more, this time 
with something of derision. 

" Why do you lie there ? " I asked her — " you were 
warmer in my arms a few moments ago ! I have stolen 
the kisses your Siivion left on those pretty lips of yours, 
— you did well to keep them from the touch of other 
men, — they were reserved for me ! Fragrant as roses I 
I found them, but somewhat cold ! But you must wish 
to hear news of Siivion, — let me tell you of him. You 
were right, — he did come to Paris." 

She made no reply, but rocked herself to and fro, still 
shivering and moaning. 

" There is a pretty nook near Suresnes " — I went 

on. " The trees there have sheltered and hidden the 

shame of your love many and many a time ! There are 

grassy nooks, and the birds build their nests to the sound 

29 



3o6 WOKMWOOD. 

of their own singing, — the river flows softly, and in the 
early morning when the bells are ringing for mass, the 
scene is fair enough to tempt even a prude to wan- 
tonness. Are you weeping ? Ah ! — we always grow 
sentimental over the scene of our pleasantest sins ! We 
love the spot, — we are drawn to it by some fatal yet 
potent fascination, and after an interval of absence, we 
return to it with a lingering fond desire to see it once 
again. Yes, I know ! — Silvion Guidel knew, — and even 
so, he, in good time returned." 

Still no answer ! Still the same shuddering movement 
and restless moaning. 

" I met him there " — I pursued, — I was beginning to 
take a fantastic pleasure in my own narrative. " It was 
night, and the moon was shining. It must have looked 
different when yoii kept your secret trystes, — for you 
chose the freshest hours of the day, when all your friends 
and relatives believed you were praying for them at mass 
like the young saint you seemed to be — it was all sun- 
shine and soft wind for you, — but for me — well ! the stars 
are but sad cold v/orlds in the sky, and the moon has a 
solemn face in spite of her associations with lovers, — 
and so I found there was something suggestive of death 
in the air when I chanced upon le beau Silvion ! We 
spoke together ; he had strange ideas of the possibility 
of mingling his love with his sworn duty to the Church, — • 
indeed, he seemed lo think that God would be on his 
side if he gave up his vocation altogether and returned 
to you. — Are you in pain that you keep up such a con- 
stant moaning } — But I soon convinced him that he was 
wrong, and that the Divine aid was always to be had for 
the right, providing the right was strong enough to hold 
its own ! And for the nonce, this strong right found its 
impersonation in 7?te. We did not quarrel, — there was no 
time for that. We said what we had to say and there 
an end. Life, — the life of a sensual priest — presented 
itself to me as a citadel to be stormed ; — I attacked, he 
defended it. I had no weapon — neither had he, — my 
hands alone did the work of justice. For it must have 
been justice, according to the highest religious tenets, 
else God would not have permitted it, and my strength 
would have been rendered useless by Divine interpo- 
sition ! Now in France they guillotine criminals, — in 



IVOKMIVOOD. 307 

England they hanj^ them, — in the East they strangle them 
— it is all one, so long as the business of breathing is 
stopped. I remembered this — and adopted the eastern 
method — it was hard work 1 can assure you, to strangle a 
man, without rope or bowstring ! — it took me time to 
do it and was difficult, — also, it was very difficult for him 
to die ! " 

"Oh God.f'' The cry was like the last exclamation 
wrung from a creature dying on the inquisitional rack of 
torture, — it was terrible, even to me, — and for a moment 
I paused, my blood chilled by that awful, despairing 
groan. But the demon within me urged on my speech 
again, and I resumed with an air of affected indifference. 

" All difficulties come to an end, of course, like every- 
thing else — and his were soon terminated. He died at 
last. I flung his body in the Seine, — well, what now } " 
for she suddenly sprang erect, and stared at me with a 
curiously vague yet hunted look, like some trapped wild 
animal meditating an escape. " You must not leave me 
yet, — you have not heard all. So! — stand still as you 
are, — you look like a young tragic muse ! — you are beau- 
tiful, — quite inspired ! — I almost believe you are glad to 
know your betrayer is dead ! I threw his body in the 
Seine, I tell you ; and a little while afterwards I saw it in 
the Morgue ! " — here I begun to laugh involuntarily. "I 
swear I should scarcely have known the Raffaelle-like 
Silvion again ! Imagine those curved red lips that used to 
smile at shadows like another Narcissus, all twisted and 
blue ! — think of the supple, straight limbs, livid and swol- 
len to twice their natural size ! — by Heaven, it was aston- 
ishing — amusing ! — the grossest caricature of manhood, — 
all save the eyes. They remained true to the departed 
covetous soul that had expressed its base desires through 
them, — they still uttered the last craving of the wrenched- 
out life that had gone, — ' Love ! — Love and Pauline ! ' " 

As I said this I smiled. She stood before me like a 
stone image — so still that I wondered whether she had 
heard. Her hair had come unbound, and she fingered a 
tress of it mechanically. 

" Love and Pauline ! " I repeated, with a sort of sat- 
isfaction in the enunciation of the two words — " that is 
what those dead eyes said, — that is what my heart says 
now I — Love and Pauline ! Silvion desired, and for a 



3o8 Vf^ORMWOOD. 

time possessed both, — at present it is my turn ! For he 
is lost in the common fosse, among crowds of other self- 
slayers, — and you cannot find even his grave to weep 
over ! Yet — strange to say — I have seen him many times 
since then " 

The passive form before me stirred and swayed like a 
slender sapling in a gust of wind — and a voice spoke 
hoarsely and feebly. 

" Seen what ? — seen whom ? " 

" Silvion ! " I answered, — my brain suddenly darkening 
with phantasmal recollections as I spoke„ — and, yielding 
to an involuntary sensation, I turned sharply round, just 
in time to perceive the figure of a priest outline itself 
dimly as though in pale phosphorescence against the 
dark corner of the narrow-built court where we stood. 
"77z^r^/" I cried furiously. "See you, Pauline? — 
There he is ! — creeping. along like a coward on some base 
errand ! I have not killed him after all ! There ! — there ! 
Look ! He is beckoning you ! " 

She sprang forward, — her eyes blazing, her arms out- 
stretched, her lips apart. 

"Where? where?" she wailed. "Silvion! Silvion 1 
Oh no, no ! You torture me ! — all is silence — blackness 
— dea^h ! Oh God — God ! — is there 7io mercy ! " 

And suddenly flinging up her hands above her head, 
she broke into a loud peal of discordant delirious laugh- 
ter and rushed violently past me out of the court. 
Horror or madness lent speed to her flight, for though I 
followed her close I could not get within touch of her. 
The rain and mist seemed to enfold her as she fled, till 
she looked like a phantom blown before me by the wind ; 
— once in the open thoroughfare, one or two passengers 
stopped and stared after her as she ran, and after me too, 
doubtless ; — but otherwise gave no heed to our headlong 
progress. Straight on she rushed, — straight to the Pont 
Neuf, which on this wet and dreary night was vacant and 
solitary. I accelerated my steps, — I strained every nerve 
and sinew to overtake her, but in vain. She was like a 
leaf in a storm, — hurled onwards by temporary insanity, 
she seemed literally to have wings — to fly instead of to 
run — but half-way across the bridge, she paused. One 
flitting second — and she sprang on the parapet I 

" Pauline 1 " I cried. " Wait ! Pauline I " 



IVOR M WOOD. 



30^ 



She never turned her head, — she raised her hands to 
heaven and clasped them as though in supplication, — 
then — she threw herself forward, as swiftly as a bird pinion- 
ing its way into space. One small, dull s})lash echoed on 
the silence, — she was gone ! I reached the spot a mo- 
ment after she had vanished, — I leaned over the parapet, 
— 1 peered down into the gloomy water -—nothing there 1 
Nothing but blank stillness — blank obscurity ! 

" Pauline ! " I muttered. " Little Pauline ! " 

Then, as I strained my sight over the monotonous 
width of the river, I saw a something lift itself into view, — 
a woman's robe blew upwards and outwards like a dark, 
■wet sail — it swirled round once — twice — thrice, — and then 
it sank again ! . . . j\[y teeth chattered, — I clung to the 
stone parapet to prevent myself from falling. And yet a 
horrible sense of amusement stirred within me, — the 
satirical amusement of a fiend ! — it seemed such a ludi- 
crous thing to consider that, after all, this weak, fragile 
child had escaped me, — had actually gone quietly away 
where I could not, dared not follow ! 

" Pauline ! " I whispered. " Tell me, — what is death 
like.'* Is it easy .<* Do 3'ou know anything about love 
down there in the cold .'' Remember viy kisses were the 
last on your lips, — mine, not Silvion's ! God Himself 
cannot undo that/ — all Eternity cannot 2i\\.Qr that / They 
will burn you in hell, they will taint you in heaven, those 
kisses of mine, Pauline ! They will part you from Silvion ! 
— ah ! — there is their chiefest sting ! You shall not be 
with him, — I say 5^ou shall not I " — and I almost shrieked, 
as the idea flashed across my perverted brain that perhaps 
after all the poets were right, and that lovers who loved 
and were faithful, met in the sight of a God who forgave 
them there love and were happy together forever, " May 
the whole space of heaven keep you asunder ! — may the 
fire of God's breath sow the whirlwind between you — may 
you wander apart and alone, finding paradise empty, and 
all immortality worthless and wearisome — every kiss of 
mine on your lips be a curse, Pauline — a curse by which 
I shall claim your spirit hereafter ! " 

Gasping for articulate speech, the wild imprecation left 
my lips without my realizing my own utterance ; I was 
giddy and faint, — my temples throbbed heavily — the blood 
rushed to my brain, — the sky, the trees, the houses, the 



316 WORMWOOD. 

bridge rushed round and round me in dark whirling rings. 
All at once my throat filled with a cold sense of suffoca- 
tion, — tears flooded my eyes, and I broke into a loud sob 
of fiercest agony. 

"Pauline! Pauline!" I cried to the hushed and 
dreary waters, — " I loved you ! You broke my heart I 
You ruined my life ! You made me what I am ! Pauline ! 
Pauline ! I loved you ! " 

The wind filled my ears with a dull roaring noise, — 
something black and cloudy seemed to rise palpably out 
of the river and sway towards me, — the pale, stern face of 
Silvion Guidel came between me and the murky skies, — - 
and with a faint groan, and a savor as of blood in my 
mouth, I lost my hold on thought and action and reeled 
down into utter darkness, insensible. 



PVoAM^you/}* 3x1 



XXXII. 

Dull gray lines with flecks of fire between them, — fire 
that radiated into all sorts of tints, — blue, green, red, and 
amber, — these were the first glimmermgs of light on my 
sense of vision that roused nie anew to consciousness. 
Vaguely, and without unclosing my eyes I studied these 
little points of flame as they danced to and fro on their 
neutral gray background ; — then, a violent shivering fit 
seized me, and I stirred languidly into my wretched life 
once more. It was morning, — very early morning — and I 
was still on the Pont Neuf, lying crouched close to the 
parapet like any h nted, suffering animal. The mist of 
dawn hung heavily over the river, and a few bells were 
ringing lazily here and there for early mass. I struggled 
to my feet, — pushed my tangled hair from my eyes, and 
strove hard to realize what had happened. Little by little 
I unravelled my knotted thoughts, and grasped at the cen- 
tral solution of their perplexity, — namely, this : Pauline 
was drowned ! Pauline, — even she ! — the little fairy thing 
that had danced and sung and flirted and prattled of her 
school at Lausanne and her love of mai-rons glaces — ■ 
even she had become a tragic heroine, wild as any Juliet 
or Francesca ! How strange it seemed ! — as the critics 
would say — how melodramatic ! For we are supposed to 
be living in very commonplace days, — though truly this 
is one of the greatest errors the modern wise-acres ever 
indulged in. Never was there a period in which there was 
so much fatal complexity of thought and discussion ; never 
was there a time in which men and women were so prone 
to analyze themselves and the world they inhabit with 
more pitiless precision and fastidious doubt and argument ; 
and this tendency creates such strange new desires, such 
subtle comparisons, such marvellous accuracy of per- 
ception, such discontent, such keen yet careless valuation 
of life at its best, that more romances and tragedies 919 



31* 



WORMWOOD. 



enacted now than Sophocles ever dreamed of. They are 
performed without any very great eciat or stage-effects, — 
for we latter-day philosophers hate to give grand names 
to anything, our chief object of study being to destroy all 
ideals, — hence, we put down a suicide to temporary in- 
sanity, a murder to some hereditary disposition, or wrong 
balance of molecules in the brain of the murderer, — and love 
and all the rest of the passions to a little passing heat of 
the blood. All disposed of quite quietly ! Yet suicides 
are on the increase, — so are murders ; and love and 
revenge and hatred and jealousy run on in their old pre- 
destined human course, caring nothing for the names we 
give them, and making as much havoc as ever they did in 
the days of Cassar Borgia. To modern casuists, however, 
Pauline would but seem " temporarily insane " — and 
during that fit of temporary insanity she had drowned her- 
self — voild tout f 

Any way she was dead ; — that was the chief thing I had 
to realize and to remember, — but with its usual obstinacy 
my brain refused to credit it ! The .mists rose slowly up 
from the river — the church bells ceased ringing ; a chill 
wind blew. I shuddered at the pure cold air — it seem.ed 
to freeze my bliod. I looked abstractedly at the river, 
und my eyes lighted by chance on a long low flat building 
yiot far distant — the Morgue. Ah ! Pauline, — if it were 
indeed she who had been " melodramatic " enough to 
drown — Pauline would be taken to the Morgue — and I 
should see her there. A little patience, — a day, perhaps 
two days, — and I should see her there ! 

Meanwhile, I was cold and tired and starved ; I would 
go home, — home if I could walk there, — if my limbs were 
not too weak and stiff to support me. Oh, for a draught 
of Absinthe ! — that would soon put fire into my veins and 
warm the numbness of my heart ! I paused a moment, 
still gazing at the dull water and the dull mists ; then all 
at once a curious sick fear began to creep through me, — 
on awful premonition that something terrible was about 
to happen, though what it was I could not imagine. My 
heart began to beat heavily ; — I kept my eyes riveted on 
the scene immediately opposite, for while the sensation I 
speak of mastered me, 1 dared not look bclwid. Presently 
I distinctly heard a low panting near me like the breath- 
ing of some heavy creature, — and my nervous dread grew 



WORMWOOD. 313 

Stronger. For a moment I felt that I would rather fling 
myself into the Seine than turn my head ! It was an 
absurd sensation, — a cowardly sensation ; one that I knew I 
ought to control and subdue, and after a brief but painful 
contest with myself 1 gathered together a slight stock, not 
of actual courage but physical bravado, — and slowly, irres- 
olutely looked back over my own shoulder, — then, un- 
speakably startled and amazed at what I saw, I turned my 
whole body round involuntarily and confronted the formi- 
dable beast that lay Crouched there on the Pont Neuf,watch- 
ing me with its sly green eyes and apparently waiting on 
my movements. A leopard of the forest at large in the 
heart of Paris ! — could anything be more strange and hid' 
eously terrifying 1 I stared at it, — it stared at me ! I 
could almost count the brown velvet spots on its tawny 
hide, — I saw its lithe body quiver with the pulsations of 
its quick breath, — and for some minutes I was perfectly 
paralyzed with fear and horror ; — afraid to stir an inch ! 
Presently, as I stood inert and terror-stricken, I heard 
steps approaching, and a laborer appeared carrying some 
tin cans which clinked together merrily, — he whistled as 
he came along, and seemed to be in cheerful humor. I 
watched him anxiously. What would he do, — what would 
he say when he caught sight of that leopard lying on the 
bridge, obstructing his progress ? Onward he marched 
indifferently, — and my heart almost ceased to beat for a 
second as I saw him coming nearer and nearer to the 
horrible creature. . . . What ! — was he blind ? — Could 
he not see the danger before him "i I strove to cry out, — 
but my tongue was like stiff leather in my mouth, — I could 
not utter a syllable ; — and lo ! — while my fascinated gaze 
still rested on him he had passed me ! — passed apparently 
over or through the animal I saw and dreaded ! 

The truth flashed upon me in an instant, — I was the 
dupe of my own frenzy — and the leopard was nothing but 
a brain-phantasm ! I laughed aloud, buttoned my coat 
close over me and drew myself erect, — as I did this, the 
leopard rose with slow and stealthy grace, and when I 
moved prepared to follow me. Again I looked at it — 
again it looked at me, — again I counted the spots on its 
sleek skin, — the thing was absolutely real and distinct to 
my vision, — was it possible that a diseased brain could 
produce such seemingly tangible shapes ? I began to 



314 WORMWOOD. 

walk rapidly, — and another peculiarity of my hallucination 
discovered itself, — namely, that/;<^^r^me as I looked I saw 
nothing but the usual surroundings of the streets and the 
passing people, — but behiftd me I knew, I felt the horrible 
monster at my heels, — the monster created by my own 
poisoned thought, — a creature from whom there was no 
possible escape. The enemies of the body we can physi- 
cally attack, and often physically repel, — but the enemies 
of the mind, — the frightful phantoms of a disordered im- 
agination — these no medicines can cure, no subtle touch 
disperse. 

And yet I could not quite accept the fact of the nerv- 
ous havoc wrought upon me. 1 saw a boy carrying a 
parcel of Figaf'os to a neighboring kiosque — and stop- 
ping him, I purchased one of his papers. 

"Tell me," I then said, lightly and with a feigned in- 
difference. " Do you see a — a great dog following me ? 
I chanced upon a stray one on the Pont Neuf just now, 
but I don't want it at my lodgings. Can you see it ? " 

The boy looked up and down and smiled. 

"y^ lie vols rien^ monsieur /" 

" Merci ! " and nodding to him I strolled away, resolved 
not to look back again till I reached my own abode. 

Once there, I turned round at the door. The leopard 
was within two inches of me. I kept a backward watch 
on it, as it followed me in, and up the stairs to my room. 
I shut the door violently in a frantic impulse of hope that 
I might thus shut it out, — of course that was useless, — 
and when I threw myself into a chair, it lay down on the 
floor opposite me. Then I realized that my case was 
one in which there could be no appeal, — it was no use 
fighting against spectra. The only thing to be done was 
to try and control the frenzy of fear that every now and 
then threatened to shake down all reason and coherency 
forever and make of me a mere howling maniac. I 
tried to read, — but found I could not understand the 
printed page, — I found more distraction in thinking of 
Pauline and her death, — if indeed she were dead. Then, 
all unbidden, the memory of the fair and innocent 
H^loise came across my mind. Should I go and tell her 
that I had had a strange dream in which it seemed as 
though I had frighttnied Pauline into drowning her- 
self ? No ! — 1 would wait ; — I would wait and watch the 



WOl^MlVOOD. 315 

Morgue, — for till I saw her there I could not be sure she 
was dead. Anon, a fragment of that old Breton song Hdloise 
used to recite repeated itself monotonously in my ears — 

" Mon etoile est fatale 
Mon etat est contre nature, 
Je n'ai eu dans ce monde 
Que des peines ^ endurer'; 
Nul Chretien sur la terre 
Me veuille du bien I " 

I hummed this over and over again to myself till I 
began to shed maudlin tears over my own wretched con- 
dition ; I had brought myself to it, — but what of that ?— 
the knowledge did not ameliorate matters. If you know 
you have done ill, say the moralists, you have gained 
the greatest possible advantage, because knowing your 
evil you can amend it. Very wise in theory no doubt ! — 
but no use in practice, /could not eliminate the poison- 
ous wormwood from my blood, — I was powerless to ob- 
literate from my sight that repulsive spectral animal that 
lay before me in such seemingly substantial breathing 
guise. And so I wept weakly and foolishly as a drivel- 
ing drunkard weeps over his emptied flagon, — and 
thought vaguely of all sorts of things. I even wondered 
whether, notwithstanding my having gone so far, there 
might not yet be a remedy for me — why not ? — there was 
a Charcot in Paris — rto man wiser, — no man kinder. 
But suppose I went to him, what would be the result. 
He would tell me to give up absinthe. Give up ab- 
sinthe ? — why then, I should give up my life I — I should 
die ! — I should be taken away to that terrible unknown 
country whither I had sent Silvion Guidel, — where Pauline 
had followed him — and I had no wish to go there ; — I 
might meet them, so I stupidly fancied, and it was too 
soon for such a meeting — yet / No ! — I could not give 
up Absinthe, — my fairy with the green eyes, my love, my 
soul, my heart's core, the very centre and pivot of my be- 
ing ! — anything but that I would do gladly ! — but not that, 
— never, never that ! Pah ! how that leopard stared at 
me as I sat glowering and thinking, and pulling at the 
ends of my moustache, in a sort of dull stupor, — the 
stupor of mingled illness and starvation. For I had 
eaten nothing since the previous day, and though I was 



3i6 WORMWOOD. 

faint, it was not the faintness of natural hunger. That is 
another peculiarity of my favorite cordial, — taken in 
small doses it may provoke appetite, — but taken in large 
and frequent draughts, it invariably kills it. The thought 
of food attracted yet nauseated me, and so I remained 
huddled up in my chair engrossed in my own reflections, 
the nervous tears still now and then trickling from my 
eyes and dropping like slow hot rain on my closely 
clenched hands. 

The sound of a bugle-note startled me for a moment, 
and sent my thoughts flying off among fragmentary sug- 
gestions of national pride and military glory. France ! 
France ! — oh, fair and radiant France ! — how canst thou 
smile on in the faces of such degenerate children as are 
clambering at thy knees to-da) ! Oh, France ! — what 
glories were thine in old time ! — what noble souls were 
born of thee ! — what white flags of honor waved above thy 
glittering hosts ! — what truth and chivalry beat in the 
hearts of thy sons, what purity and sweetness ruled the 
minds of thy daughters ! The brilliancy of native wit, of 
inborn courtesy, of polished grace, were then the natural 
outcome of naturally fine feelings ; — but now, — now ! — 
what shall be said of thee, O France, who hast suflfered 
thyself to be despoiled by conquerors and art almost for- 
getting thy vows of vengeance ! Paris, steeped in vice 
and drowned in luxury feeds her brain on such loath- 
some literature as might make even coarse-mouthed 
Rabelais and Swift recoil, — day after day, night after 
night, the absinthe-drinkers crowd the cafes, and swill the 
pernicious drug that of all accursed spirits ever brewed 
to make of man a beast, does most swiftly fly to the seat 
of reason to there attack and dethrone it ; — and yet, the 
rulers do nothing to check the spreading evil, — the world 
looks on purblind as ever and selfishly indifferent, — and 
the hateful cancer eats on into the breast of France, 
bringing death closer every day. France ! — my France ! 
degraded, lost, and cowardly as I am, — too degraded, too 
lost, too cowardly to even fight in the lowest ranks for 
thee, there are moments when I am not blind to thy 
glories, when I am not wholly callous as to thy fate ! I 
love thee, France ! — love thee with the foolish, powerless 
love that chained and beaten slaves may feel for their 
native land when exiled from it, — a love that cannot prove 



WO/iMlVOOD. 317 

its strenp^th by any great or noble act, — that can do noth- 
ing, — nothing but look on and watcii tlicc slipping like a 
loosened jewel out of the blazing tiara of proud nations, 
— and watching, know most surely that /, and siic/i as /, 
have shaken thee from what thcui wert, and what thou 
still shouldst be ! ^'- Aux armes^ citoyens ! " /cry stupidly, 
as my patriotic reverie breaks in my brain like a soap- 
bubble in air, — " Fonnez vos bniaillons !^' 

Ah God ! — I start from my chair, staggering to and fro, 
my head clasped between my hands ; — I am dreaming 
again, like a fool ! — dreaming, — and here I am, an absin- 
theur in the city of Absinthe, and glory is neither for me, 
nor for thee, Paris, thou frivolous, lovely, godless, las- 
civious dominion of Sin ! Godless ! — and why not ? — • 
sinful ! — and why not? God did not answer us when we 
prayed, — He was on the side of the Teutons. And we 
have found out that when we try to be good, life is hard 
and disagr^reable ; when we are wicked, or what moralists 
consider wicked, then w-e fmd everything pleasant and 
easy. Some people find the reverse of this, or so they 
say, — well ! — they are quite welcome to be virtuous if 
they choose. I tried to be virtuous once, and with meit 
failed to prove its advantages. I loved a woman honestly^ 
and was betrayed ; another man loved the same woman 
^/i-honestly and — kept her faith ! This was God's doing 
(because everything is done by the will of God) therefore 
you see it was no use my striving to be honest ! False 
arguments? specious reasoning ? — not at all ! I have the 
logic of an absintheur ! voila tout! 

That leopard again ! — By-and-bye I began to find a 
certain wretched amusement in watching the sunlight play 
on the smooth skin of this undesired spectral attendant, 
and I endeavored to accept its presence with resignation. 
After a while I discovered that when I remained passive 
in one place for some, time, the hallucination was brought 
forward in front of my eyes, — whereas when I walked or 
was otherwise in rapid motion it was only to be seen 
behind me. Let scientists explain this if they can, by 
learned dissertations on the nerve-connections between the 
spine and brain-cells, the fact remains that the impression 
created upon me of the actual palpable presence of 
the animal was distinct and terribly i-eal^ — and though 
later on I found I could pass my hand through its shin- 



3i8 WORMWOOD. 

ing substance, the conviction of its reality never left me. 
Nor is there much chance of its ever leaving me, — it is 
with me now, and will probably continue to haunt me to 
my dying day. I walk through Paris apparently alone, 
but the huge, panting, stealthy thing is always close 
behind me, — my ears as well as my eyes testify to its 
presence, — I sit in cafes and it lies down in front of me 
and we — the spectre and I — stare at each other for hours ! 
People say I have a downward look, — sometimes they ask 
why I so often give a rapid glance behind me as though 
in fear or anxiety ; — well ! — it is because I always have a 
vague hope that this pi antasmal horror may go as sud- 
denly as it came — but it never does — it never will ! Andrd 
Gessonex used to peer behind him in just the same 
fashion, — I remembered it now, and understood it. And I 
idly wondered what sort of creature the Absinthe-fairy 
had sent to him so persistently that he should have seen 
no way out of it but suicide. Now /had the courage of 
endurance, — or let us say, the cowardice ; for I could not 
bear the thought of death, — it was the one thing that ap- 
palled me. For I so grasped the truth of the amazing 
fecundity of life everywhere, that I knew and felt death 
could not be a conclusion, — but only the silence and time 
needed for the embryo-working of another existence. And 
on that oth . existence I dared not ponder ! Oh, if there 
is one thing I rate t in the Universe more than another, 
it is the uncertainty of Creation's meaning. Nature is a 
great mathematician, so the scientists declare — then why 
is the chief number in the calculation always missing ? 
Why is it that no matter how we count and weigh and 
plan, we can never make up the sum total ? There is 
surely a fault somewhere in the design, — and perchance 
the great unseen, silent, indifferent Force we call God, 
has, in a dull moment, propounded a vast Problem to 
which He Himself may have forgotten the Answer 1 



tVORM^yOOD. 



3^9 



XXXIII. 

During the next two days I lived for the Morj^ue, and 
the Morgue only. I could not believe Pauline was dead 
till I saw her there, — there on the wet cold marble where 
her lover had lain before her. 1 haunted the place, — I 
skulked about it at all hours like a thief meditating 
plunder. And at last my patience was rewarded. An 
afternoon came when I saw the stretcher carried in from 
the river's bank with more than usual pity and reverence, — 
and I, pressing in with the rest of the morbid spectators, saw 
the fair, soft, white body of the woman I had loved and 
hated and maddened and driven to her death, laid out on 
the dull hard slab of stone like a beautiful figure of frozen 
snow. The river had used her tenderly — poor little 
Pauline ! — it had caressed her gently and had not dis- 
figured her delicate limbs or spoilt her pretty face, — she 
looked so wise, so sweet and calm, that I fancied the cold 
and muddy Seine must have warmed and brightened to 
the touch of her drowned beauty ! 

Yes ! — the river had fondled her ! — had stroked her 
cheeks and left them pale and pure, — had kissed her lips 
and closed them in a childlike happy smile, — had swept 
all her dark hair back from the smooth white brow just to 
show how prettily the blue veins were pencilled under the 
soft transparent skin, — had closed the gentle eyes and 
deftly pointed the long dark lashes in a downward sleepy 
fringe — and had made of one little dead girl so wondrous 
and piteous a picture, that otherwise hard-hearted women 
sobbed at sight of it, and strong men turned away with 
hushed footsteps and moistened eyes. The very officials 
at the Morgue were reverent, — they stood apart and 
looked on solemnly, — one of them raised the tiny white 
hand and examined a ring on the finger, a small enamel 
forget-me-not in gold, and seemed about to draw it off, 
but on second thoughts left it where it was. / knew that 



320 



WORMWOOD. 



ring well, — HeloTse had given it to her — it was a trinket 
for which she had always had a sentimental fondness 
such as girls often indulge in for perfectly worthless 
souvenirs. I stared and stared, — I gloated on every 
detail of that delicate, half-nude form, — and my brain 
was steady enough to remind me that now — now it was 
my duty to identify the poor little corpse without a mo- 
ment's delay, so that it might be borne reverently to the 
care of the widowed Comtesse de Charmilles and Heloise 
St. Cyr. Then it would receive proper and honorable 
interment, — and Pauline, like Shakespeare's Ophelia 
would have 

" Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home 
Of bell and burial." 

But no ! — I put away the suggestion as soon as it 
occurred to me. I took a peculiar delight in thinking 
that if her body were not identified within the proper inter- 
val, she too, like her lover, Silvion Guidel, would be cast 
into the general ditch of death, without a name, without 
a right to memory ! My deformed and warped intelli- 
gence found a vivid pleasure in the contemplation of such 
petty and unnecessary cruelty, — it seemed good to me to 
wreak spite upon the dead, — and as I have already told 
you, the brain of a confirmed absintheur accepts the most 
fiendish ideas as both beautiful and just. If you doubt 
what I say, make inquiries at any of the large lunatic 
asylums in France, — ask to be told some of the aberrations 
of absinthe-maniacs, who form the largest percentage of 
brains gone incurably wrong, — and you will hear enough 
to form material for a hundred worse histories than mine ! 
What can you expect from a man, who has poisoned his 
blood and killed his conscience ? You may talk of the 
Soul as you will — but the Soul can only make itself mani- 
fest in this life through the Senses, — and if the Senses are 
diseased and perverted, how can the messages of the 
spirit be otherwise than diseased and perverted also.? 

And so, yielding to the devilish humors working within 
me, I held my peace and gave no sign as to the iden- 
tity of Pauline ; — but I went to the Morgue so frequently, 
nearly every hour in fact, and stared so long and persist- 
ently at her dead body that my conduct at last attracted 
some attention from the authorities in charge. One even- 



ivoA'AfiyooD. - 321 

ing, the third, I think, after she had been laid there, an 
offical tapped me on the arm. 

" Pardon ! Monsieur seems to know the corpse ? " 

I looked at him angrily, and though there were a few 
people standing about us, I ^ave him the lie direct. 

" You mistake. I know nothing ! " 

He eyed me with suspicion and disfavor. 

" You seem to take a strange interest in the sight of 
the poor creature, all the same ! " 

*' Well, what of that ? " I retorted. " The girl, though 
dead, is beautiful ! I a man artist ! — I have the soul of 
a poet ! " and I laughed ironically. *' I love beauty — 
and I study it wherever I find it, dead or living, — is that 
so strange 1 " 

" But certainly no, not at all ! " said the official, shrug- 
ging his shoulders and still looking at me askance. " Only 
there is just this one little thing that I would say. If we 
could obtain any idea, however slight, — any small clue 
which we might follow up as to the proper identification 
of this so unfortunate demoiselle^ we should be glad. She 
was a lady of gentle birth and breeding — we have no 
doubt of that, — but the linen she wore was unmarked, — 
we can find no name anywhere except one contained in a 
locket she wore " 

]My nerves shook, and I controlled myself with difficulty. 

" What sort of locket ? " I asked. 

" Oh a mere trifle, — of no value whatever. We opened 
it, of course, — it had nothing inside but a withered rose 
leaf and a small slip of paper, on which was written one 
word, ' Silvion.^ That may be the name of a place or a 
person — we do not know. It does not help us." 

No ! — it did not help them — but it helped me ! — helped 
me to keep my puny rage more firmly fixed upon that help- 
less smiling, waxen-looking thing that lay before me in 
such solemn and chilly fairness. A withered rose-leaf, 
and the name of that accursed priest — these were her sole 
treasures, were they .'' — all she cared to save from the 
wreckage of her brief summer time ! Well, well, women 
are strange fools at best and the wisest man that ever 
lived cannot unravel the mystery of their complex mech- 
anism. Half puppets, half angels ! — and one never knows 
to which side of their natures to appeal ! 

" We have given a very precise and particular de- 



322 WORMWOOD. 

scription of the corpse in our annonces^^ — went on the 
cfiicial meditatively — " but at present it has led to nothing. 
We should be really glad of identification, — though it is 
only a question of sentiment " 

" A question of sentiment ! What do you mean ? " I 
asked roughly. 

He gave a deprecatory gesture. " Monsieur, we French- 
men have hearts ! La pauvre petite there is too delicate 
and pretty to lie in the Qox^vcvoxi fosse I " 

Good God ! What an absurd influence the loveliness 
of a woman can exert on the weak minds of men ! Here 
was a girl dead and incapable of knowing whether she 
was lying in the Qovavixoxi fosse or any other place of inter- 
ment, and yet this stern officer of the Morgue, touched by 
her looks, regretted the necessity of burying her thus 
harshly and without reverence. 

I laughed carelessly. 

" You are very gallant, Monsieur ! I wish I could assist 
you ! This girl-suicide is beautiful as you say, — I have 
contemplated her face and figure with much pleas- 
ure " 

" Will you look at her more closely. Monsieur ? " he 
asked, suddenly turning a keen glance upon me. 

I perceived his drift. He suspected me of knowing 
something, and wanted to startle me into confessing it ! 
Cunning rogue ! — But I was a match for him ! 

" I shall be charmed to do so ! " I responded with 
easy indifference. " It will be a privilege ! — a lesson in 
art ! " 

He said nothing, but simply led the way within. One 
minute more, and the electric light flashed in a dazzling 
white effulgence over the drowned girl, — I felt the official's 
eye upon me, and I kept firm. But in very truth I was 
sick — sick at heart ! — and a chill crept through all my 
blood, — for I was near enough to touch the woman I had 
so loved ! — I could have kissed her! — her little white stiff 
hand lay within a few inches of mine ! I breathed with 
difficulty, — do what I would, I could not prevent a slight 
shiver visibly shaking my limbs. And she ! — she was like 
a little marble goddess asleep — poor little Pauline ! 

Then — all suddenly — the official bent over her corpse 
and raised it up forcibly by the head and shoulders, . . , 
I thought I should have shrieked aloud ! 



IVORMIVOOD. 323 

" Do not touch her ! " T exclaimed in a hoarse whisper. 
" It is a — sacrilege ! " 

He looked at me steadily, quite unmoved by my 
words. 

"You are sure you cannot identify the bodyj- — yuu 
have no idea who she was when living ?" he demanded, 
in measured accents. I shrank backward. As he held 
the dead girl in that upright attitude 1 was afraid she 
might open her eyes ! 

" I tell you, no / " I answered with a sort of sullen 
ferocity. " No, no, no / Lay her down ! Why the devil 
can you not let her be ? " 

He gave me another searching, distrustful look. Then 
he slowly and with a certain tenderness laid the body 
back in its former recumbent position, and beckoned me 
to follow him out of the mortuary. I did so. " Voyons, 
Monsieur " — he said confidentially — " this is not a case of 
murder, — there is no ground for any suspicion of that kind. 
It is simply a suicide, — we have many such, — and surely 
from your manner and words, you could, if you choose, 
give us some information. Why not speak frankly ? Par 
exemple^ will you swear that you know absolutely nothing 
of the woman's identity?" 

Persistent fool ! I returned his glance defiantly, — we 
were in the outer chamber now, and the glass screen was 
once more between us and the corpse, so I felt more at 
ease. 

"Why, oaths are not of such value nowadays in 
France ! " I answered carelessly. " Our teachers have 
left us no God, so what am I to swear by ? By your head 
or my own .-' " 

He was patient, this man of the Morgue, and though I 
spoke loudly, and there were people standing about, he 
took no offence at my levity. 

" Swear by your honor, Monsieur ! — that is enough." 

My honor ! Ha ! — that was excellent ! — I, who had no 
more sense of honor than a carrion crow ! 

" By my honor, then ! " I said, laughing — " I swear I 
know nothing of your pretty dead Magdalen in there ! A 
fillede joie, no doubt ! Strange that so many men have pity 
for such ; even the amiable Christ had a good word to 
say on behalf of these naughty ones ! What was it ? — Yes 
—I remember* — ^Her sins, which are many, are forgiven 



324 IVORMWOOD. 

her^ for she loved much / * True — love excuses many fol- 
lies. And she, — the little drowned one, — is charming — I 
admire her with all my heart ! — but I cannot tell you who 
she is or, — to speak more correctly — who she was ! " 

As I uttered the deliberate lie, a sort of electric shock 
ran through me — my heart leaped violently and the blood 
rushed to my brows, — a pair of steadfast, sorrowful lus- 
trous eyes flashed wondering reproach at me over the 
heads of the little throng of spectators, — they were the eyes 
of Helo'ise St. Cyr ! 

Yes ! — it was she ! — she had kept her word ! — she had 
come to rescue Pauline, — to defraud me of my vengeance 
on the dead ! Stately, angelic, pitiful, and pure, she stood 
in that cold and narrow chamber, her face pale as the 
face of her drowned cousin, — her hands tremblinjjlv out- 
stretched ! As in a dream I saw the press of people 
make way for her, — I saw men take off their hats and re- 
main uncovered as though a prayer were being spoken, — 
I saw the official in charge approach her and murmur 
some respectful inquiry, — and then — then I heard her 
voice, sweet though shaken with tears, — a voice that sent 
its penetrating music straight to the very core of my 
wretched and worthless being ! 

" I come to claim her ! " she said simply, addressing 
herself to the official. " She is my cousin, Pauline de 
Charmilles, — only daughter of the late Count de Charmilles. 
We have lost her — long ! " — and a half sob escaped her 
lips — "Give her tome now, — and I will take her — oh, 
poor Pauline ! — I will take her . . . home!'' 

Her strength gave way — she hid her face in her hands — 
and some women near her began crying for sympathy. It 
was what cynical people would call a " seme " — and yet — 
somehow, I could not mock at it as I would fain have done. 
The spirit of Humanity was here — even here among the 
morbid frequenters of the Morgue, — the " touch of nature 
which makes the whole world kin " was not lacking any- 
where — save in me ! — and more than all, Heloise was 
here, — and in her presence one could not jest. One 
believed in God ; — one always believes in God, — by the 
side of a good woman ! 

I raised my eyes, — I was resolved to look at her straight, 
— and I did so — but only for one second ! For her glance 
swept over me with such unutterable horror, loathing, and 



ivoi^AnvooD, 325 

agony, that I cowered like a slave under the lash ! I 
crept out of her sight ! — 1 slunk away, followed by the 
phantom beast of my own hideous degradation, — away — 
away — out into the chill darkness of the winter night, 
defeated I Defeated ! — defrauded of the last drop in my 
delirious draught of hatred ! — Alone under the cold and 
starless sky, I heaped wild curses on myself, on God, — 
on the world I — on life and time and space I — while she 
— the angel Heloise, whose love I had once possessed 
unknowingly, bore home her sacred dead, — home to a 
maiden funeral-couch of flowers, sanctified by tears and 
hallowed by prayers, — home, — to receive the last solemn 
honors due to Innocence and — Frailty i 



326 WO^MH^OOD. 



XXXIV. 

What was there to do now ? Nothing, — but to drink 
Absinthe ! With the death of Pauhne every other definite 
object in living had ended. I cared for nobody ; — while 
as far as my former place in society was concerned I had 
apparently left no blank. You cannot imagine what little 
account the world takes of a man when he ceases to set 
any value on himself. He might as well never have been 
born, — or he might be dead, — he is as equally forgotten, 
and as utterly dismissed. 

I attended Pauline's funeral of course. I found out 
when it was to take place, — and I watched it from a dis- 
tance. It was a pretty scene, — a sort of white, fairy 
burial. For we had a fall of snow in Paris that day, — 
and the small coffin was covered with a white pall, and all 
the flowers upon it were white ; — and when the big vault 
was unbarred to admit this dainty burden of death hidden 
in blossoms, its damp and gloomy walls were all covered 
with wreaths and garlands, as though it were a bridal 
chamber. This was the work of Heloise, no doubt ! — 
sweet saint Heloise ! She looked pale as a ghost and 
thin as a shadow that afternoon ; — she walked by the side 
of the widowed Comtesse de Charmilles, who appeared 
very feeble of tread, and was draped in black from head 
to foot. I gazed at the solemn cortege from an obscure 
corner in the cemetery, — and smiled as I thought that I 
— I only had wrought all the misery on this once proud 
and now broken-down, bereaved family ! — I, and — Ab- 
sinthe ! I/l had remained the same Gaston Beauvais that 
I once had been, — if on the night Pauline had made her 
wild confession of shame to me, I had listened to the 
voice of mercy in my heart, — if I had never met Andr^ 
Gessonex . . . imagine! — so much hangs on an "if "I 
Now and then a kind of remorse stung me, — but it was a 
mere passing emotion, — and it only troubled me when I 



IVORMWOOD. 327 

thought of or saw Heloisc. She was, as she now is, the 
one reproach of my Hfe, — the only glimpse of God I have 
ever known ! When Pauline was laid to rest, — when the 
iron grating of the cold tomb shut grimly down on all 
that was mortal of the bright foolish child 1 had first met 
fresh from her school at Lausanne, — this same sweet, pale 
He'loYse lost all her self-control for a moment, and with a 
long sobbing cry fell forward in a swoon among the little 
frightened attendant acolytes and their flaring candles, — 
but she recovered speedily. And when she could once 
more stand upright, she tottered to the door of the mau- 
soleum, and kissed it, — and hung a wreath of white roses 
upon it, on which the word " Amour i " was written in 
silver letters. Then she went away weeping, with all the 
rest of the funeral train — but I — I remained behind ! 
Hidden among the trees I lay quiet, in undiscovered 
safety, so that when the night came I was still there. 
The guardians of Pere-la Chaise, patrolled the place as 
usual and locked the gates — but I was left a prisoner 
within, which was precisely what I desired. Once alone 
— all all alone in the darkness of the night, I flung up my 
arms in delirious ecstasy — this City of the Dead was 
mine for the time ! — mine, all these mouldering corpses 
in the play ! I was sole ruler of this wide domain of 
graves ! I rushed to the shut-up marble prison of Pau- 
line — I threw myself on the ground before it, — I wept and 
raved and swore, and called her by every endearing name 
I could think of ! — the awful silence maddened me ! I 
beat at the iron grating with my fists till they bled ; — 
" Pauline ! " I cried — " Pauline ! " No answer ! — oh God ! 
— she would never answer any call again ! Grovelling in 
the dust I looked up despairingl}^ — the word " Amour ! " 
with its silvery glisten on Heloise's rose-garland, flashed on 
my eyes like a flame. " Amour " — Love ! God or the 
Devil ! It is one or the other; it is the thing that rules 
the universe, — it is the only Deity we can never abjure ! 
Love ! — oh madness ! Tell me, women and men, tell me 
whether love rules your lives most for good, or most for 
evil ? Can we not get at the truth of this ? If we can, 
then we shall know the secret of life's riddle. For if Love 
lead us most to evil, then the hidden Force of Creation 
is a Fiend, — if it lead us most to good, then — then we 
have a God to deal with ! And I fear me much it is a God 



32^ trORMWOOD. 

after all ! — I shudder to think it, — but I am afraid — 
afraid ! For if God exists, then they — all the dead 
creatures I know, whose spirits haunt me, — they are happy, 
wise, victorious and immortal — while I — I am lower than 
the veriest insect that breeds in the mould and is blind to 
the sun ! 

I must not dwell on this ; — I must not look back to 
those hours passed outside Pauline's tomb. For they were 
horrible ! Once, as the night waned, I saw Silvion Gui- 
del, — he leaned against the pillars of the vault and barred 
my way with one uplifted hand. I could not fight him — a 
creature of the mist and air! — but his face was as the face 
of an angel, and its serene triumph filled me with impo- 
tent fury ! He had won the day, I felt — Pauline was his 
— not mine ! God had been on his side, and Death, in- 
stead of conquering him, had given him the victory! 

One day, weeks after Pauline's burial, I was very ill. 
I could not move at all — the power of my limbs was gone. 
Such a strange weakness and sick fever beset me that I did 
nothing but weep for sheer helplessness. It was a sort of 
temporary paralysis — it passed away after a while, but it 
left me terrified and unstrung. When I got better, a droll 
idea entered my brain. I would go to confession ! I, 
who hated priests, would see what they could tell me for 
once, — I would find out whether Religion, or what was 
called religion, had any mystical saving grace for an 
absintheur I I was abjectly miserable at the time, — a fit 
of the most intolerable depression had laid hold upon me. 
Moreover, I had been foolishly hurt by chancing to see 
my father walking along with his new partner, — the man 
he had adopted in my place, — a fine, handsome, pleasant, 
dashing-looking fellow, — and he, — my father, — had seemed 
perfectly happy ! — Yes, perfectly happy ! He had not 
seen me, — probably he would not have known me if he 
had, — he leaned upon the arm of his new '* son " — and 
laughed with him at some jest or other ; — he had forgotten 
me ! — or if he had not actually forgotten, he was de- 
termined to appear as though he had. I thought him 
cruel, — callous ; — I blamed faith, and everything and 
everybody except myself who had wrought my own un- 
doing. 'J'hat is the way with many of us, — we get wilfully 
and deliberately into mischief, — then we look about to see 
on which one of our fellow-creatures we can lay the fault 1 



WORMWOOD. y.^ 

*' Open confession is good for the soul ! " says some 
moralist or other. 1 determined to try it — for a change ! 
And my confessor should be good old P^re Vaudron ! — I 
wondered I had never thought of him before. He might 
have been some comfort to me, — for he was an honest 
Christian, and therefore he would not be likely to turn 
away from any penitent, however fallen and degraded. 

But was I penitent 1 Of course not ! I was miserable 
I. tell you ; — and 1 wanted the relief of unburdening my- 
self to some one who would not repeat what I said. I 
was not sorry for anything — I was only tired, and made 
nervous by the spectral beast that followed me, as well as 
by other curious and frightful hallucinations. Fiery 
wheels in the air, — great glittering birds of prey swooping 
down with talons outstretched to clutch at me, — whirl- 
pools of green in the ground into which it seemed I must 
fall headlong as I walked — these were common delusions ; 
— but I began to dread madness as I had never dreaded 
it before, — and the more I considered the matter, the 
more determined I became to speak to Pere Vaudron, 
who had known me from boyhood ; — it might do me good, 
— there were miracles in the Church, — who could tell ! 

And so one evening I made my way up to the little 
well-remembered chapel, — the place where, if all had 
gone smoothly, I should have been married to Pauline, 
— the altar where " le beau Silvion " had " assisted " his 
too-confiding uncle at early mass. Everything was very 
quiet, — there were flowers about, — and the sacred lamps 
of vigil were burning clearly. A woman was sv/eeping 
out the chancel, — I recognized her at once, — it was old 
Margot. She did not know me ; she looked up as I en- 
tered, but finding (no doubt) my appearance the reverse 
of prepossessing, she resumed her task with increased 
vigor. Save for her and myself, the church was empty. 
After waiting a little I went up and spoke to her. 

" Does Al. the cur^ hear confessions this evening ? " 

She stared at me and crossed herself, — then pointed to 
the sacristy bell. 

" Sonnez^ s'il vous plait ! " 

She was always curt and cross, this old Margot ! — I 
tried her again. 

" It is not the usual hour, perhaps ? " 

She made no reply ; — so, smiling a little at her acerbity 



330 ' IVORMWOOD. 

I did as she bade me and rang the bell she indicated. 
A small boy appeared, — an acolyte. 

'' Does the reverend father attend the confessional this 
evening ? " 

" Yes. He will be in the church almost immedi- 
ately." 

I retired and sat down to wait. I was beginning to 
feel very much amused. This was the finest jest I had 
ever played with myself, — I was actually pretending to 
have a conscience ! Meanwhile old Margot took her 
departure with her broom and all her cleansing para- 
phernalia — and left me alone in the church. She banged 
the big door behind her noisily, — and the deep silence 
that followed its hollow reverberation oppressed me un- 
comfortably. There was a large crucifix near me, and 
the figure of Christ upon it looked tortured and grue- 
some ; what a foolish fond enthusiast He was, I thought, 
to perish for such a delusive idea as the higher spirit- 
ualization of Man ! We shall never become spiritual; — 
we are of the earth earthy — our desires are base, — our 
passions contemptible ; but as we have been created so 
we shall remain, seloji moi ; — others may hold a different 
opinion if they choose. 

A slow step sounded on the marble floor, and I hast- 
ily bent my head as penitents do, looking between my 
clasped fingers at good old Vaudron as he came through 
the sacristy and paced gently towards the confessional. 
Heavens ! how changed he was ! — how he stooped ! — 
and his hair was snow-white, — his face too, once so florid 
and merry, was wrinkled, careworn, and pale. He had 
suffered, even he, this poor old man, — and his suffering 
was also my work ! God ! what a fiendish power one 
human being has to ruin many others ! I waited till he 
was seated in the usual niche — then I made my way to 
the penitent's corner. As I knelt I heard him mutter the 
usual Latin formula, — he deemed me also at my prayers, 
but 1 said nothing. I kept silence so long, that at last 
he sighed impatiently, and putting his lips close to the 
curtained grating said mildly — 

" I am waiting, my son ! Take courage ! " 

My sense of amusement increased. I could have 
laughed aloud, it was sucli a comedy. 

^^Mon /mV 1 murmured, controlling myself with aa 



IVORMIVOOD. 331 

effort, " my confession will be strange and terrible, — are 
you prepared for something quite unusual ? " 

I felt that he was startled, — but in his quiet accents 
there was only just the faintest touch of sternness as he 
replied — 

" I am prepared. Commend yourself to God — to Him 
you speak as well as to me, — therefore be truthful and 
conceal nothing, as only by true confession can you hope 
for mercy ! " 

"The jargon of the Church as usual!" I said con- 
temptuously. " Spare me unnecessary platitudes, good 
father ! My sins are not those of every day, — and every- 
day comfort will not do for me. And so to begin at once, 
— I have murdered a man / This and no less is my crime ! 
— can you give me absolution ?" 

I heard a sudden agitated movement inside the confes- 
sional. Through the small holes of the grating I could 
see him clasp his hands as though in terror or prayer. 
Then he spoke. 

" Absolution ? Wretched soul, there is none — none ! 
Unless you at once confess yourself to the authorities and 
give yourself up to justice, there is no forgiveness either 
in earth or heaven for such an evil deed. Who was the 
man .? " 

" My enemy ! " 

" You should have pardoned him ! " 

" Good father, you are not consistent ! According 
to your own account, God Himself does not pardon till 
justice is done. I — like Deity — wanted justice ! I killed 
a deceiver, a liar, a seducer, — a priest who robbed me of 
the woman I loved ! " 

A shuddering sigh — half a groan escaped him. 

" A priest !— oh God ! " 

" Yes, a priest," I went on recklessly. " What then ? 
Priests are worse than laymen. Their vocation deprives 
them of love, — they crave for it because it is forbidden 
and will have it at all risks. And he, the man I killed — 
had it, — he won it by a mere look, a mere smile ; he had 
fine eyes and a graceful trick of manner. He was happy 
for a time at any rate. He was as beautiful as an angel 
— as gifted as a Marcus Aurelius ! — Did you never know 
any one like him ? He had the best of all the Avorld could 
give him in the love of a woman as fair as the morning. 



332 IVORMIVOOD. 

She is dead too now. She drowned herself as soon as 
she knew he was gone — and that I had killed him ! So 
he keeps her love to the end you see, — and I am baffled 
of it all. That is why I have come to you — just because 
I am baffled, — I want you to comfort me — I want a victory 
somewhere ! I want you to tell me that the man I mur- 
dered is damned to all eternitv, because he had no time to 
repent of his sins before he died ! I want you to tell me 
that she — the woman, — is damned also, because she killed 
herself without God's permission ! Tell me any lies the 
Church will allow you to tell ! Tell me that I am safe 
because I endure! — because though loaded with sin and 
vice, I still live on, waiting for God to kill me rather than 
myself ! Tell me all this and I will read all the Peniten- 
tial Psalms in the cafe this evening instead of the ' Petit 
Journal! ' " I paused for lack of breath, — I could see 
Vaudron start up from his seat in horror as I uttered my 
reckless tirade — and now, when I gave him time to speak, 
his voice trembled with righteous indignation. 

" Blasphemer, be silent ! " he said — " Wretched, un- 
happy man — how dare you presume to enter God's house 
in such a condition ? You are mad or drunk — you af- 
front the Sacrament of Confession by ribald language ! — 
you insult the Church ! Pray for true contrition if you 
can pray — and go ! — I will hear no more ! " 

" But you s/iall hear ! " I said wildly. " You must hear ! 
I have murdered a man, I tell you! — and the accursed 
memory of his dying eyes, his dying face, clings to me like 
a disease in the air ! You do not ask me who he was — yet 
you know him ! — you loved him ! He was your nephew — 
Silvion Guidcl ! " 

Hardly had the words left my lips when the confes- 
sional doors flew open, and Vaudron rushed upon me, — 
he clutched me by the arm, his fine old face burning with 
wrath. 

" You murdered him ! — you — you ! " he gasped, his eyes 
glittering, his hand uplifted as though he would have 
struck me down before him. 

I smiled. 

" Even so, good father ! I, — simply I ! And here I 
am, — at your mercy — only remember this, — what I have 
said to you is under t!ie seal of confession /" 

His upraised arm dropped nerveless at his side — he 



IVORAnVOOD. 



z^z 



stared fixedly at me, his breath coming and goinp; rapidly 
as though he had been running a race. Then, still liold- 
ing me in a fast grip, he dragged me to the front of the 
altar where the light shed by the swinging lamps could fall 
directly upon my features. There, like one in some fever- 
ish dream, he scanned me up and down, doubtfully at 
first, then with gradually dawning, horrified recognition, 

" God have mercy upon me ! " he ejaculated tremu- 
lously ; " it is Gaston Beauvais ! " 

" Precisely so, mon cJier Vaudron ! " I replied com- 
posedly. " It is Gaston Beauvais ! It is the Gaston 
Beauvais who was duped and betrayed, — and who has 
avenged his wrong in the good old Biblical fashion, by 
killing his betrayer ! More than this — it is the Gaston 
Beauvais who drove Pauline de Charmilles to her self- 
sought death, by telling her the fate of her lover, — what 
could you expect ! — she was a silly girl always ! And nov/ 
I unburden myself to you that you may know me ; and 
that I also may know if there is any <^ruth in the religion 
you profess. I think not, — for you, an ordained serv- 
ant of the Church, have already shown something of un- 
seemly violence I Your grip on my arm is not of the 
lightest, I assure you ! — ycu have given way to anger, — 
fie, ph-e Vaudron ! Wrath in the sanctuary is not becom- 
ing to your order ! What ! — did you fancy you were a 
ma7i for once, — instead of a priest .? " 

I did not mean to offer him this insult, — the bitter jest 
escaped my lips before I was aware of it. But it made no 
visible effect on him, — he merely loosened his hold of me 
and stood a step or two apart, looking at me with strained 
anguished eyes. 

" You can break your vows, if you like," I went on care- 
lessly. " Vows of every kind are brittle ware nowadays. 
You can tell my father I am a murderer, — the murderer 
of Silvion Guidel — and so give him fresh cause to con- 
gratulate his foresight in having disowned me, — you can 
tell Heloise St. Cyr that I goaded her cousin to madness, 
— you can betray me to the guillotine. All this is in your 
power, and by doing it you will only prove, like many 
another of your craft, how lightly a Creed weighs in the 
balance against personal passion, . . . you will be wise 
in your generation like the Pharisees of old " 

" Stop — stop ! " he cried hoarsely, flinging up his hands 



334 WORMWOOD. 

and clasping them above his head. " I cannot bear It- 
ch God ! 1 cannot bear it ! Wretched man, what have 
/done to you that you should so torture me ! " 

I was silent. What had he done ? Why — nothing ! I 
watched him coldly, — his countenance was a strange 
study ! He was fighting a mental battle, — a conflict of 
sworn duty against all the claims and instincts of man- 
hood, — it seemed surprising to me that he should deem it 
worth his while to engage in such a struggle. A few 
minutes passed thus, — no one entered the church — we 
were alone with all the familiar things of religion about 
us, the lamps above us shedding a blood-like hue on the 
figure of the Christ crucified. Presently, as though 
drawn by some compelling instinct he turned towards 
this Image of his Faith, — a great sigh broke from his lips, 
— and, tottering feebly forward, he fell upon his knees 
and hid his face, — I saw tears trickling slowly between 
his wrinkled fingers. Foolish old man ! His simplicity 
vexed me — he looked like the picture of a praying 
apostle, with the faint glow from the light above the 
cross falling in the shape of a halo round his silvery 
hair ! 

And I — I stood irresolute, — half abashed, wholly enni- 
barrassed, — inclined to laugh or weep, I knew not which; 
— when all at once a horrible sensation overwhelmed me, 
— something snapt asunder in my temples like a suddenly 
cut wire, — the whole nave of the church grew black as 
pitch, and I threw out my hands to keep myself from fall- 
ing. Then came masses of pale green vapor that twisted 
and twirled, and sent shafts of lambent fire, or lightning 
as it seemed, into the very centre of my brain ! — but 
through it all, though I seemed caught up and devoured 
by flame, I saw Vaudron's devout figure kneeling at the 
crucifix ; and I rushed to it as to some certain rescue. 

" Save me ! " I cried desperately. " Have you no 
pity.-"' and I clutched at his garment. "Do you not see? 
— I am going mad ! — mad ! " 

And I burst into a peal of delirious laughter that woke 
loud eches from the vaulted roof and startled my own 
ears with a sense of horror. But with that laughter, the 
paroxysm passed, — my brain cleared, and I regained my 
self-control as by an electric shock that only left my limbs 
trembling. Pere Vaudron meanwhile had risen from his 



irO/i^JIflVOOD. 335 

knees and now confronted me, his features pallid with 
woe and wonder. 

** Pardon me ! " I said, and forced a smile. " I am not 
well! I have nervous delusions, — 1 suffer from too much 
dissipation — I am a victim to pleasure ! Self-indulgence 
is an agreeable thing, — but it has its consequences which 
are 7wt always agreeable. It is nothing — a mere passing 
ailment ! But now, good father, — as you have said your 
prayers — (and I hope gained much benefit thereby !) 
may I ask if you have no word for me ? It is the duty of 
a priest, I believe, if he cannot give absolution, to at 
least enjoin penance ! " 

He met my satirical glance with a stern sorrow in his 
own e]'es — the tears were still wet on his cheeks. 

"The secret of your crime is safe with me ! " was all he 
said, — and turned away. 

I hastened after him. 

'' Is that all ? " I asked, half banteringly. 

He stopped, and looked fixedly at me once more ; — the 
agony depicted in his face would have touched me had 
my heart not been harder than adamant. 

" All ! " he exclaimed passionately. " Is it not the 
'all' you need? You tell me you murdered the unhappy 
Silvion, — you, — Gaston Beauvais, of all men in the world ! 
— and why have you told me ? Simply to weigh me down 
to the grave with the awful burden of that hidden knowl- 
edge ! You have no regret or remorse. — you speak of 
what you have done with the most horrible cynicism, — 
and to talk of penance to you would be to outrage its 
very name ! For God's sake leave me ! — leave me to the 
wretchedness of my lonely old age, — leave me, while I 
have strength to let you go unharmed — I am but human ! 
• — your presence sickens me — I have no force to bear — 
more " 

His voice failed him, — he made a slight gesture of dis- 
missal. 

"And I — do you not think /am miserable.'*" I said 
angrily. " What a set of egotists you are — you and my 
father, and the whole baraqtic ! Fine Christians truly ! — 
always pitying yourselves ! Have you no pity for me ? " 

The old cure drew himself up, the dignity and pathos 
of his grief making his homely figure for the moment 
majestic. 



336 WORMWOOD. 

" I pity you, God knows ! " he said solemnly. " I pity 
you more than the lowest pitiable thing that breathes ! 
A man with the curse of Cain upon his soul, — a man with- 
out a heart, without a conscience, without psace in this 
world or hope in the next ;— as Christ lives, 1 pity you ! 
."But do not expect more of me than pity ! I am a poor 
frail old man, — lacking in all the virtues of the saints — 
and I cannot — Heaven help me ! I cannot forgive you ! " 
— and his voice shook as, waving me back, with one hand, 
he walked feebly to the door of the sacristy — " I cannot ! 
— Christ have mercy upon me ! — I cannot ! I have no 
strength for that, — the poor child Pauline— the wretched 
Silvion ! — no, no ! I cannot forgive ! — not yet ! God 
must teach me to do that — God must help me, — of my 
own accord I camiot ! " 

On a sudden impulse I flung myself on my knees be- 
fore him. 

" Pere Vaudron ! " I cried. " Remember ! — You knew 
me as a child — you loved me as a boy — you are my father's 
friend ! Think — I am a wreck — a lost soul ! — will you 
let me go without a word of comfort ? " 

He stood inert — his face pale as death, his lips quiver- 
ing. The struggle within him was very bitter — his breath 
came hard and fast, — he too had loved that accursedly 
beautiful Silvion ! After a pause, he raised his shaking 
hand and pointed to the crucifix. 

"There — there !^' he muttered brokenly — '-^Qo there — 
and — pray ! As a man I dare say nothing to you — as a 
priest I say, God help you ! " 

Poor old man ! His Christian heroism was sorely 
tried ! He drew his garment frcm my touch, — the sac- 
risty-door opened and shut, — he was gone. 

I sprang to my feet and looked about me. I was alone 
in the church, — alone and face to face with the crucifix, — 
the great, gaunt, bleeding Figure with the down-dropped 
Head and thorny crown. " Go the?'e — and pray ! " What 
— X ? — I an absintheur ? Kneel at a crucifix ? — Never ? 
It could do me no good, I knew, — whatever miracle it 
might work on others ! 

Poor old Vaudron ! I had made him miserable — 
poor, simple, silly, feeble soul ! " God help you ! " he 
had said — not " God, pardon you ! " He knew the Eter- 
nal Code of Justice better than to use the word " pardon." 



IVOKMIVOOD 



337 



I should scarcely have thought he had so much firmness 
in him — so much staunch manhood. It was not in human 
nature to easily forgive such a criminal as I, — and he, in 
spite of i^is vocation, had been true to human nature. I 
honored him for it. Human Nature is a grand thing! 
Sometimes noble, sometimes mean, — sometimes dignified, 
sometimes abject, — what an amazing phase of Creation it 
is ! — and though so human, how full (at odd intervals) of 
the Divine !^ The crucifix is its Symbol, — for Man at his 
best is an Ideal, — and when he reaches this point of per- 
fection, the rest of his race hang him up on a cross like a 
criminal in the sight of the centuries, to mock at, to wor- 
ship now and then, and to sneer at still more frequently, 
for says the world — " Look at this fool ! He professed to 
be able to live a nobler life than we, and see where we 
have nailed him ! " 

And I passed the dead Christ with an indifferent shrug 
and smile as I stumbled out of the quiet church into the 
chill air of the night, and thought how little the Christian 
creed had done for me. It had (perhaps) persuaded 
Vaudron to "pity " me, and to say, " God help " me, — but 
what cared I for pity or a vaguely divine assistance ? I 
had better material wherewith to deal ! — and, humming the 
fragment of a tune, I sauntered drowsily down to the 
Boulevards, and there, as a suitable wind-up to my 
" religious " evening, got dead drunk, — on Absinthe I 

22 



33$ WOJiMWOOD, 



XXXV. 

The time that immediately followed that night is a blur 
to me ; — I have no recollection at all of anything that 
happened. For I was very ill. During the space of a 
whole month I lay in my bed, a prey to violent fever and 
delirium. So I was told afterwards; — I knew nothing. 
The people at my lodgings got alarmed and sent for a 
doctor, — he was a good fellow in his way, and took an 
amiably scientific interest in me. When I recovered my 
senses he told me what I knew very well before, — namely, 
that all my sufferings were due to excessive indulgence in 
Absinthe. 

" You must give it up," he said decisively, " at once, 
— and forever. It is a detestable habit, — a horrible craze 
of the Parisians, who are positively deteriorating in blood 
and brain by reason of their passion for this poison. What 
the next generation will be, I dread to think ! I know 
it is a difficult business to break off anything to which 
the system has grown accustomed, — but you are still 
a young man and you cannot be too strongly warned 
against the danger of continuing in your present course 
of life. Moral force is necessary, — and you must exert 
it. I have a large medical practice, and cases like yours 
are alarmingly common, and as much on the increase as 
morphinomania amongst women, — but I tell you frankly 
no medicine can do good, where the patient refuses to 
employ his own power of resistance. I must ask you 
therefore, for your own sake, to bring all your will to bear 
on the effort to overcome this fatal habit of yours, as a 
matter of duty and conscience." 

Duty and conscience ! I smiled, — and, turning on my 
pillows, stared at him curiously. Pie was a quiet, self- 
possessed man of middle age, rather good-looking, with 
a calm voice and a reserved manner. 

" Duty and conscience ! " I murmured languidly. " How 



IVORMIVOOD. 



339 



well they sound — those good little words ! And so, doc- 
tor, you consider me in a bad condition ? " 

He surveyed me with a cold, professional air. 

" I certainly do," he answered. " If it were not for 
the fact that you have the recuperative forces of youth in 
you, I should be inclined to pronounce you as incurable. 
Were I to analyze your state " 

" Do so, I beg of you I " I interrupted him eagerly. 
" Analyze me by all means ! — I am fond of science ! " He 
looked at me dubiously and felt my pulse, watch in hand. 

" Science is in its infancy," he said meditatively, " es- 
pecially medical science. But some few facts it has en- 
tirely mastered. And so, speaking without any reserve, 
I must inform you that if you persist in drinking absinthe 
you will become a hopeless maniac. Your illness has 
been a sort of God-send, — it has forced you to live a 
month under my care without tasting a drop of that in- 
fernal liquid. And a certain benefit has been the result, 
so that in a way you ^.tq prepared to be cured. But your 
brain-cells are still heavily charged with the poison and 
a violent irritation has been set up in the nerve-tissues. 
Your blood is contaminated — and its flow from the heart 
to the brain is irregular, — sometimes violently interrupted ; 
— a state of things which naturally produces giddiness, 
swooning, and fits of delirium which resemble strong 
epilepsy. Such a condition might make you subject to 
hallucinations of an unpleasant kind " 

" Just so ! " I interposed lazily. " And with all your 
skill, doctor, you have not got rid of that brute down 
there ! " 

He started, — and gazed inquiringly in the direction to 
which I pointed, where plain and tangible to my eyes, the 
tawny spectral leopard lay o?i my bed, not below it, its great 
yellow forepaws resting close to my feet. 

" What brute ? " he demanded, bringing his calm glance 
to bear upon me once more, and again pressing his cool, 
firm fingers on my throbbing pulse 

I explained in a few words the hateful delusion that 
had troubled me so long. His brows knitted, and he 
seemed perplexed. 

" No cure for me .? " I asked mdifferently, noting the 
expression of his face. 

"I do not know — I cannot tell," he answered hur- 



340 



WORMWOOD. 



riedly. ** Such persistently marked spectra is generally the 
symptom of existing disease, — I had hoped otherwise-^ 
but " 

" You had hoped it was merely temporary," I said* 
** Ah, I understand ! But if disease has actually begun, 
what is the remedy ? " 

He hesitated. 

" Come — speak ! " And I raised myself on my pil- 
lows impatiently. "You need not be afraid to give an 
opinion ! " 

" There is no remedy," he replied reluctantly. " Dis- 
ease of the brain is incurable, — it can only be retarded. 
Care, good food, quiet, and total abstinence from any sort 
of spirituous poison, — this regi?ne can avert, and probably 
check any fresh symptoms, — in some cases a normal con- 
dition can be attained which very nearly approaches com- 
plete cure. More than this would be impossible to 
human skill . . ." 

" Thanks ! " I murmured, lying back on my bed again. 
**You are very good ! I will think over what you say; 
though to tell you the truth, it seems to me quite as 
agreeable to be mad as sane in this monotonous world ! " 

He moved away from me to the table where he sat 
down and wrote a prescription. I noted his appearance 
drowsily, — his sleek head,- his well-fitting clothes, — the 
clean, pale, business-looking hand that guided the pen. 

" Voyo?is / " I said, with a laugh, — " In all the range of 
your experience, did you ever know an absintheiir give up 
Absinthe ? — even for the sake of ' duty and conscience ' ? " 

He made no answer — he merely took up his hat, looked 
into the crown of it, bowed slightly, and took his depart- 
ure. 

A couple of weeks later on I was able to rise from my 
bed and crawl about again, and then it was that I found I 
was getting very short of money. My illness had cost me 
dear ; — and I soon recognized that I should have to va- 
cate my already poor apartment for one in some still 
cheaper and lower quarter. And I should have to do 
something for a living, — something, if it were but to beg 
for pence, — something even to obtain the necessary coins 
wherewith to purchase Absinthe. And one day, the 
weather being warm and sunny, I wandered into the 
Tuileries gardens and sat there, drowsily pondering on 



ivoi^AnvooD. 34 1 

my own fate, — turning; over \.\\Kt pros and consoi my miser- 
able existence, and wondering wliat 1 sliould do to enable 
myself to live on. For worthless as my life was, — worth- 
less as I knew it to be, I did not want to die, — I had not 
the necessary courage for that. 

All at once like a rainbow of hope in a dark sky, there 
came to me the thought of H^loise St. Cyr. Her fair 
and saintly presence seemed to pass, a holy vision, before 
my sight, — and in my weak and debilitated state, the tears 
rushed to my eyes at the mere remembrance of her 
womanly truth and sweetness. Her voice, with its soft 
musical cadence seemed to float invitingly towards me, — 
nay, — I even fancied I heard the melodies of the violin 
she played so well, echoing faintly through the quiet air. 
I would go to her, I thought ; — would go, while I was 
crushed and broken down by the effects of my illness, 
I would tell her all and plead for pity — for pardon ; — I 
would ask her to help me, — to save me from myself as 
only a good woman, God's angel on earth, ever can save 
a wretched man. And if she wished—if she commanded 
it — I would, — yes ! I would actually give up absinthe for 
her sake, — she should do with me what she would, — my 
wrecked life should be hers to dominate as she chose ! 

I rose up hastily, the tears still in my eyes, — and, lean- 
ing on a stick, for I was unable to walk without this sup- 
port, I made my way with painfully slow step stowards 
the house of the De Charmilles. For all I knew the 
Countess and her niece might not be there, — they might 
have gone south for the winter. Still I felt that I must 
make an attempt, however futile, to see the only creature 
in the world who could, just at this juncture in my life, 
possibly even now be my saviour ! 

There were a great many people in the streets ; every- 
thing looked bright and suggestive of pleasure — the sun- 
shine was brilliant, and the Champs Elysees were crowded 
with happy children sporting in the merry-go-rounds, and 
driving in the pretty goat-carriages, while their nurses 
and governesses mounted tender guard over their innocent 
pastimes. I thought I had never seen Paris wear such 
a beautiful aspect ; — a gentle mood was upon me, — I 
was sorrowful yet not despairing, — and though I was not 
actualh' cognizant of any poignant remorse for all the evil 
I had wrought I was conscious of a faint, yearning desire 



342 tVOKMM^OOD. 

to atone. The last little spark of my better nature had 
roused itself into a feeble glow, and it kindled within me 
a sense of shame, a touch of late — and useless — penitence. 
I little knew how soon this nobler fire was to be quenched 
in darkness ! — I little guessed what swift vengeance the 
wild Absinthe-witch can take on any one of her servitors 
who dares to dream of disputing her inexorable authority ! 
And by-and-by my laggard, faltering movements brought 
me to the familiar street, — the well-known stately mansion 
where I had so often been a welcome guest in happier 
days. The gates stood open, — but there was something 
strange about the aspect of the place that made me rub 
my eyes and stare in vaguely stupid wonder, — what dark 
delusion had seized upon me now ? The gates stood open, 
as I said, — and the circumstance that awoke in me such 
dull confusion and amazement was, that the portals of the 
hall-door were also flung wide apart, and the whole en- 
trance was hung with draperies of black festooned with 
white ; heavy draperies that trailed mournfully like droop- 
ing banners, down to the ground below. Again I rubbed 
my eyes violently — I could not believe their testimony — 
they had so often deceived me. Was this a spectral 
hallucination ? I advanced hesitatingly — I ascended the 
steps — I approached those dreary black hangings and 
touched them ; — they were real, — and the hall beyond 
them was dark and solemn, the gleam of a few tall candles 
sparkling here and there like tapers in a tomb. No one 
noticed me, though there were many people passing in 
and out — they were dressed in black and moved softly, — 
they pressed handkerchiefs to their eyes and wept as they 
went to and fro ; — many of them carried flowers. Gradu- 
ally the meaning of the sombre scene dawned upon me, 
— this was what is called in France a '"'' chapclle a7'dente^^ 
— a laying-out of the dead in state, — an opening of the 
doors to all comers, friends or foes, that they may be en- 
abled to look their last on the face they loved or hated ! 
h.'"'' chapelle ardente^^ — yes! — but for whom.? Who was 
dead ? The answer flashed upon me at once, — it was the 
widowed and unhappy Comtesse de Charmilles who had 
gone the way of all flesh, — of course ! — it must be she ! 
Bereft of husband and child, what more natural than that 
she should have wearied of life, and longed to jcin her 
lost loved ones 1 — and fresh tears sprang to my eyes as \ 



iVORAflVOOD. 



343 



realized the certainty that lliis was so. Poor soul !— I 
remembered her quiet grace and reposeful dignity — her 
charming manners, her queenly yet sweet maternal ways 
— her invariable kindness and gentleness to me wiien 
I was her son-in-law in prospective. And now she was 
no more, — she had sunk down, broken-hearted, to the 
grave, — and in her death I felt that I too had the most 
cruel share ! 

" Wretched man that 1 am ! " I thought, as I leaned 
feebly against the great staircase, up and down which the 
visitors were going and returning. " 1 am accursed ! — 
and only Heloise can free me of my curse ! " 

Mastering my emotion by an effort, I addressed a maid- 
servant who passed me at the moment. 

" She is dead 1 " I asked in hushed accents. 

" Alas, yes, monsieur ! She is dead ! " 

And the girl broke into tears as she spoke, and hurried 
away. 

I awaited another minute or two, — then gathering up 
my strength, I ascended the stairs slowly with the rest of 
the silent, tip-toe treading mourners. The smell of fresh 
incense, minr^ling with the heavy perfume of lilies, was 
wafted towards me as I came nearer and nearer the 
chamber which was now turned into a high altar of death's 
service, — a glimmer of white hangings caught my eyes, — 
white flowers, — all white ! Strange ! — white, pure white, 
was for those who died young ! And the pretty phraseol- 
ogy of an old French madrigal passed through my memory 
involuntarily : 

"Comme la rose quitte la branche du rosier 
La jeunesse quitte la vie; 
Celles qui mourront jeune, 

Onles couvrira de fleurs nouvelles; 
Et du milieu de ces fleurs 
Elles s'eleveront vers le ciel, 
Comme le passe-vole du calice des roses! '* 

Another step — another — hush — hush ! What beautous 
still-faced angel was that, pillowed among pale cyclamens 
and tranced in frozen sleep ? . . . 

I dashed aside the silken hangings, — like a madman I 
rushed forward. . . . 

" Heloise /"I shrieked. " Heloise I " 

^ # =» « 9|C Jf( 



344 WORMWOOD. 

Dead — dead 1 Grovelling on the ground in wild agony, 
I clutched handfuls of the flowers with which her funeral 
couch was strewn — I groaned — I sobbed — I raved ! — I 
could have killed myself then in the furious frenzy of my 
horror and despair ! 

" Heloise ! " I cried again and again. " Heloise ! 
Wake ! Speak to me ! Curse me ! Love me ! Oh 
God, God ! you are not dead ! — not dead ! Heloise ! — 
Heloise ! " 

The fair face seemed to smile serenely. " I am safe ! " 
was its mute expression. " Safe from evil — safe from 
sorrow — safe from love — safe howi you I I have escaped 
your touch, — your look — your voice — and all the bitter- 
ness of ever having known you ! And being now grown 
wise in death I pardon — I pity you ! — Leave me to rest in 
peace ! " 

Shaken by tearless sobs of mortal agony, I gazed dis- 
tractedly upon that maiden image of sweet wisdom and 
repose ; — the loose gold hair, unbound to its full rippling 
length, caught flickers from the sunlight through the 
window-pane, — the fringed white eyelids fast closed in 
eternal sleep were delicately indented as though some 
angel's finger-tips had pressed them down caressingly, — 
the waxen-hands were folded meekly across the bosom, 
where a knot of virgin lilies wept out fragrance in lieu of 
tears. Dead — dead! Why had Death taken her? — why 
had God wanted her — God, who has so many saints — 
why could He not have spared her to the earth which has 
so few ! Dead ! — and with her had died my last hope of 
good, — my last chance of rescue ! And I buried my head 
again among the odorous funeral flowers and wept as I 
had never wept before, — as I shall never have sufficient 
heart or conscience in me to weep again ! 

Suddenly a hand touched me gently on the shoulder. 

" Senor ! " 

The voice was that of a stranger,^the accent Spanish 
— and I looked up in sullen wrnth, — who was it that dared 
thus to intrude upon my misery ? . . . A man stood be- 
side me, — a lithe, dark creature with soft brilliant brown 
eyes, — eyes that just then were swimming in tears ; his 
whole mobile face expressed emotion and sympathy — and 
in one hand he licld — a violin. 

" Seoor " — he again murmured gently. " Let me en- 



IFOA'AflVOOD. 



345 



treat of you to restrain your p^rief 1 It alarms the people 
who come to render their last homage — it unnerves them 1 
See you ! — we are alone in this room — the others are 
afraid to enter. Pray, pray do not give way to such dis- 
traction ! — she was happy in dying, — her health had de- 
clined for some time and she was glad to go, — and her 
death was beautiful, — it was the quiet falling asleep of in- 
nocence ! " 

His look, his words, his manner bewildered me. 

" You saw her die ? " I muttered confusedly. " You 
— you " 

'^ Helas ! paiivre enfant! she passed away with her 
hand in mine ! " he answered softly, and as he spoke, he 
took up a cluster of flowers from the couch, and, kissing 
them, laid them again in their former position. 

I rose to my feet trembling violently, a sombre wrath 
gaining possession of my soul. 

" And' who af-e you ? " I said. " Why are you here ? '' 

" I am Valdez, the violinist," he replied, — and then I 
recollected, — this was the very *' maestro " about whose 
performances Heloise had used to be so enthusiastic. 
" I came hither because she sent for me," he continued. 
** I travelled all the way from Russia. She wanted me, — 
it was to give me this, before she died." 

And he touched the violin he held, — her violin ! — her 
chiefest treasure ! — and she had bestowed it upon him f 

A sickening suspicion arose in me and almost choked 
my utterance. What bond had there been between her 
— the dead Heloise — and this man, the musical puppet of 
a mob's capricious favor .^ What if she had not died in- 
nocent after all ! . . . 

" Were you her lover .? " I demanded breathlessly. 

He drew back amazed, with a gesture of mingled pain 
and hauteur. 

" Her lover ? — I ? You can jest in the presence of 
death, monsieur .?...! love art, — not women." 

I stared at him in dubious anger. The dead girl be- 
fore us held some secret hidden behind her closed eyes 
and set, smiling lips, — a secret 1 feverishly craved to 
fathom ! 

" But she," I said. " She must have loved you — to 
have given you that I" 
. And I pointed to the violin. 



346 WO/^MWOOD. 

His dark face lightened into a grave smile, — a new 
and sudden interest flashed in his eyes. But he was 
otherwise unmoved. 

*' I do not see that at all " — he murmured. *' She 
knew I would value such a gift, — that it would be more 
precious to me than to any one else in the world, — and 
that is why she was so anxious I should have it. Still, 
. . . she may have loved me, — secretly, as many other 
women have loved me, — I never thought of that ! — yet — 
it is possible ! It was her music I cared for, — she 
played divinely ! — and her violin, this violin — is a treas- 
ure beyond price ! Ah ! what sounds I will invoke from 
it ! I laid it by her side to-day, — I had a fancy that 
some message from the other world might steal into it 
from her dead presence, and make its tone more deep, 
more thrilling, more absolutely perfect and pure ! " 

I advanced upon him in rough haste, — something in my 
eyes must have startled him, for he recoiled slightly — 
but I went close up and laid my burning hands upon his 
shoulders. 

" Be silent ! " I gasped hoarsely. " Is this the place or 
time to talk your art-jargon ? Have you no soul, except 
for sound 1 She loved you ! — I feel it, — I know it — I 
am sure of it — she loved you, — yes ! — you never knew 
it I dare say, — men never do know these things ! But 
see what she has done for you ! — she has left her spirit 
with you — there — in that violin you hold ! — her graceful 
fancies, her noble thoughts, her tenderness, her sweet- 
ness — you have it all imprisoned there, — all to come 
forth at your bidding ! When you play, she, Heloise, 
will speak to you, caress you, teach you, help you, com- 
fort you ! — and I — I hate you for it — I hate you ! For 
now I know she never would have pitied me, — never 
would have loved me again as she loved me once, — for in 
dying, she had no thought for me — she only thought of 
you — you, on whom Fortune smiles from day to day ! 
Judge then how I hate you ! — how I cannot do otherwise 
than hate you ! — for she has given you all — and left me 
nothing ! Nothing I . . . my God ! — nothing ! " 

And with a savage cry I flung him from me and rushed 
from the room, not daring to look again on the white 
anirel-face of that dead woman who smiled with such 
triumphant sweetness, with such indifferent coldness, on 



IfORMlVOOD. 347 

my desperate despair ! I saw people make terrified way 
for me as I ran, — I heard some one exclaim that 1 was 
mad with grief ! — but I paid no heed, — whether I was rec- 
ognized or not I neither knew nor cared ! Out into the 
street I plunged, as it were, into the thick of the passers- 
by .. . could I not lose myself, I wildly thought ! — could 
I not obliterate myself from sight and sense and speech 
and action ? — was there not some deep wide open grave 
into which I could fall swooningly and there be covered 
in before I had time to suffer or struggle ? Oh, for a sud- 
den death without pain ! — oh ! for a swift cessation to 
this scorching bitterness in my blood — this heavy aching 
of my heart ! Sick to the very dregs of misery, I raved 
for days in feverish agony, — agony that was blind, des- 
perate, hopeless, helpless, cureless ! What spectres stood 
beside me then ! — what horrid voices shouted in my ears ! 
— how strange and loathly the half-formed creatures that 
followed me and mouthed at me, gibbering in uncouth 
speech scarcely intelligible ! — how the murdered man 
Silvion came and looked at me as at some foul thing ! — 
how Pauline, fair and pale, with a dying sweetness in her 
smile drifted by me, finely fairy-like as ?. tleecy cloud in 
summer-time ! — and, ah God ! how the soft large eyes of 
Heloise beamed piteous wonder and reproach upon me 
like bland stars shining solemnly on a criminal in his 
cell ! Those eyes — those eyes ! — they tortured me, — their 
mildness chilled me ! — their pure and unimpassioned 
lustre shamed me ! — they were angels' eyes, and their 
holy innocence scared and shook me to the soul ! Oh, 
that horrible time ! — oh, those dreary, wild dark days and 
nights of utter loss and blank wretchedness ! — that fright- 
ful space of torment in which every nerve in my body 
seemed torn and wrenched by devils ! — how I was able 
to live through it, I cannot tell ! 

And when, like all other things, it wore itself out at 
last, — when I grew calm, with the dreadful calmness of 
sheer stupefaction and exhaustion, — then — then I realized 
it all, and my Absinthe-witch gave me a clue to the whole 
mystery ! There was a God! — yes ! actually a God — a 
great, terrific, cruel, unforgiving, awful Being, and He in 
all His omnipotence had set Himself against me ! He 
whose proud Will evolved the growing Universe, — He 
had arrayed His mighty forces of Heaven and Hell 



348 WORMWOOD. 

against one miserable atom of earth ! — and the Titanic 
wheels of Life, Time and Eternity were all whirled into 
motion to grind me, a worm, down to destruction ! One 
v;ould think it a waste of power on God's part! — but He 
would seem to be most particular in trifles. Note how 
carefully He tints the rose, from deepest crimson to ten- 
derest pink ! — how recklessly He drops the avalanche on 
a village full of harmless souls asleep ! What infinite 
pains He has bestowed on the burnish and hue of the pea- 
cock's plume ; — all to make of a useless bird with a harsh 
voice, a perfect marvel of color and brilliancy ! — and 
what a deaf ear He turns to the shriek of the murderer's 
victim ! Who will account for these things in Nature's 
plan ? It is useless for any good pious folks to tell me 
that my miseries are my own fault. What have I done, I 
pray you, save drink Absinthe ? I have poisoned my 
brain and blood ! — well — but how ridiculously small the 
seed from which such grim results have sprung! /am 
not to blame if the Creator has done His work badly, — if 
He has made the brain so delicate and the spirit so vola- 
tile that its quality and comprehension vanish at the touch 
of — Wormwood. Nothing but wormwood, — it is a plant 
as well as a metaphor, — and God made it ! God gives us 
plenty of it in our lives, as well as in our liquor ! — and the 
preachers tell us bitterness is very wholesome ! Every- 
thing is God's work — even evil, — and when, with the aid 
of my life's elixir, I grasped this fact thoroughly, I saw it 
was no use offering any more resistance to fate. For I 
was left without the smallest vestige of hope, — the little 
spark of penitence in me had been revived too late, — and 
throughout the whole drama^ no one had thought of me ! 
Silvion Guidel had died thinking of Pauline, — Pauline had 
drowned, with the name of her lover on her lips, — and 
H^loise, even Heloise, had bestowed her last word, her 
last looks, not on me, but on a comparative stranger — a 
mere musical virtuoso I God's meaning was made plain I 
I was left to my own devices, — it was shown me distinctly 
that my life was without interest to any one but myself. 
I accepted the hint. As it was decreed so it must be, — « 
and I did as Andre Gessonex had done before me, — killed 
the last vestige of my flickering conscience in me with a 

final blow, — and became — what I ami 

m m * m n ti, 



tyuKMiyooD, 



349 



L'ENVOI. 

And what am I ? My dear friends, I have told you, — 

an absinthcur ! Absi?ithcur^ pit?- ct simple !—voila tout! 
I am a thing more abject than the lowest beggar that 
crawls through Paris whining for a soul ! — I am a slink- 
ing, shuffling beast, half monkey, half man, whose aspect 
is so vile, whose body is so shaken with delirium, whose 
eyes are so murderous, that if you met me by chance 
in the day-time, you would probably shriek for sheer 
alarm ! But you will not see me thus — daylight and I 
are not friends. I have become like a bat or an owl 
in my hatred of the sun ! — it shone gloriously when 
H^loise was lying dead, — I have not forgotten that ! . . . 
At night I live; at night I creep out with the other ob- 
scure things of Paris, and by my very presence, add 
fresh pollution to the moral poisons in the air I 1 gain 
pence by the meanest errands, — I help others to vice, — 
and whenever I have the opportunity I draw down 
weak youths, mothers' darlings, to the brink of ruin, 
and topple them over — if I can. For twenty francs, 
you can purchase me body and soul, — for twenty francs 
I will murder or steal, — all true absi?itkeurs are pur- 
chasable ! For they are the degradation of Paris, — 
the canker of the city — the slaves of a mean insatiable 
madness which nothing but death can cure. Death ! — 
that word reminds me, — I have the means of death in 
my power and yet — I cannot die ! Strange, is it not ? 
... A little while ago I came upon one of my class in 
dire distress, — he had been a noted chemist in his day,— • 
but he is nothing now — nothing but an absintkeur^ who 
suffers grinding physical tortures v/hen he has no money 
wherewith to purchase what has become the emerald 
life-blood of his veins. I found him in a fit of rage, 
rolling in his garret and howling imprecations on all 
mankind — he was just in the mood to do what I asked 



35© 



WORMIVOOD. 



of him. It was a trifle ! — a mere friendly exchange of 
poisons ! I gave him tl;e absinthe for which he craved 
so desperately, — and in return, he prepared for me a 
little phial of liquid, crystal-clear as a diamond, harmless- 
looking as spring-water — a small draught, which if once I 
have the courage to swallov/, will give me an instant exit 
from the world ! Imagine it ! — I shall not suffer I am 
told, — first a giddiness — then a darkness, — and that is 
all. I take it out often — that little glittering flask of 
death, — I look at it, — I wonder at it, — for it is the key 
to the Eternal Secret, — but I dare not drink its contents ! 
I dare not, I tell you ! — I am afraid — horribly afraid ! — 
any condemned criminal is braver than I ! For the 
longer I live, the more I realize that this death is not 
the actual end, — there is something afterwards ! — and 
it is the Afterwards that appals me. Life is precious ! 
— yes, even my life, surrounded with phantoms, dark- 
ened with delirium, enfeebled by vice and misery as it is, 
it is precious ! I know its best and worst, — its value and 
worthlessness ; — I can measure it and scorn it, — I can 
laugh at it and love it ! — I can play with myself and it 
as a tiger plays with its torn and bleeding prey ! — and 
knowing it, I cling to it — I do not want to be hurled into 
what I do not know ! Some day perhaps — when a blind, 
dark fury overcomes my brain, — when spectres clutch at 
me and sense and memory reel into chaos, then I may 
drink the fatal draught I bear about with me : — but I 
shall be truly mad when I do ! — too mad to realize my 
own act ! I shall never part with life consciously, or 
while the faintest glimmer of reason remains in me ; — 
be sure of that ! I love life — especially life in Paris ! — 
I love to think that I and my compeers in Absinthe are 
a blot and a disgrace on the fairest city under the sun ! 
— I love to meditate on the crass stupidity of our rulers, 
who though gravely forbidding the sale of poisons to the 
general public, permit the free enjoyment of Absinthe 
everywhere ! — I watch with a scientific interest the 
mental and moral deterioration of our young men, and I 
take a pride in helping them on to their downfall ! — I 
love to pervert ideas, to argue falsely, to mock at virtue, 
to jeer at faith, and to instil morbid sentiments into the 
minds of those who listen to me ; — and I smile as I see 
how " La revanche " is dying out, and how content the 



yyORMH^OOD. 351 

absinthe-drinker is to crouch before the stalwart, honest, 
beer-bred Teuton ! It is a grand sight! — and we are a 
glorious people ! — just the sort of beings Who are con- 
stituted to caper and make mouths at ' pcrfule Albion " — 
and capture mild English tourists in mistake for German 
spies ! All is for the best ! — Let us drink and dream and 
dance and carouse and let the world go by ! Let us 
make a mere empty boast of honor, — and play off spark- 
ling witticisms against purity, — let us encourage our 
writers and dramatists to pen obscenities, — our painters 
to depict repulsive nudities — our public men to talk loud 
inanities — our women to practise all the wiles of wan- 
tons and cocottes I But with this, let us never forget to 
been thusiastic when we are called upon to sing the 
" Marseillaise." How does it go ? — 

" Amour sacre de la patrie 

Conduis, soutiens nos bras vengeurs,— 
Libert^, liberty cherie 

Combats avec tes defenseurs ! 
Sous nos drapeaux que la Victoire 

Accoure a tes males, accents 
Que tes ennemis expirants 

Voient ton triomphe et notre gloire I " 

Just so ! Let us always glorify Liberty, though we are 
slaves to a vice ! Lift up your voices, good countrymen, 
in chorus ! — 

" Aux armes citoyens ! Formez vos battaillons ! 
Marchons ! qu'un sang impur abreuve nos sillonsl " 

Bravo ! — Only let us roar this loudly enough, with 
frantic tossing of arms and waving of banners, — with 
blare of trumpets, with tears and emotional embraces, 
and we shall perhaps by noise and blague^ if by nothing 
else, convince ourselves if we cannot convince other 
nations, that France is as great, as pure and as powerful 
us she was in her Lily-days of old ! We can shut our 
eyes to her decaying intelligence, her beaten condition, — 
her cheap cynicism, her passive atheism, her gross ma- 
terialism, — we can cheat ourselves into believing that a 
nation can thrive on Poison, — we can do anything so 
long as we hold fast to the Marseillaise and the Tricolor ! 
Mere symbols ! — and we scarcely trust them, — but never- 



152 



WORMWOOD, 



theless they are our last chance of safety ! France is 
France still, — but the conqueror's tread is on her soil — 
and we — we have borne it and still can bear it — we have 
forgotten — we forget ! What should we want witn 
Victory ? — We have Absii^the i 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



H&SS 
A 

3369 







'liii 



h'iii':" 



I hi,' 



mm 



Mi;!i> 



